Our first question is from Rita.
(1) we had an entry strategy to fight the war in Afghanistan. Why have we failed on the exit strategy?
James Cleverly?
Thank you. There was a very clear imperative for the west, NATO, to initiate the action in Afghanistan. The attacks on the world trade centres were devastating, British people lost their lives of course, as well as the Americans, and Al-Qaeda was being harboured in Afghanistan, so the initial entry was to prevent Al-Qaeda from using Afghanistan as a base of operations, and that initial mission was a success.
So why did we fail on the exit strategy? That is Rita's question.
Over the last 20 years, there have been no successful terrorist attacks emanating from Afghanistan. We then chose collectively also to seek to bring about a positive change in Afghanistan, support women's emancipation, education, the implementation ...
James, the question is why have we failed on the exit strategy?
To implement democracy, and that has proven to be a much, much harder proposition. The British position had always been that we wanted to have an exit based on certain criteria, certain conditions that had been met.
Do you think that has happened?
The American administration obviously felt they wanted to leave within a particular time frame, and we've now seen that there has been, both from the Trump administration and the Biden administration, a delivery on that American domestic, American decision, and we are now seeing the ripple effects from that. There is still work to do. We need to make sure that we embed the successes that we have had, and there have been some successes, and we also need to make sure that Afghanistan doesn't once again become the place where terrorist attacks happen.
Rory?
The reason why it failed is that it was reckless, shameful, essentially the entire Afghan air force was destroyed as we left, and the American forces left overnight. The big question is why were we pushing for the exit at all? In South Korea, the United States has been there for 70 years. They've got 25,000 troops there. If they had left after to help the years, they would have left at a time when South Korea had a GDP per capita lower than the Congo in a military dictatorship. If you are going to get involved, get involved patiently, and we had a Lightfoot print of 2,000 British and American soldiers that could have remained there with very few casualties at low cost. This was an unnecessary reckless defeat.
(2) My question is to James. You said to implement democracy. The two are contrasting things. How can you peacefully implement democracy?
There is definitely a demand for for democracy. We've seen this.
From the Afghan people?
From a quarter of the members of the jirga, the Afghan parliament, they are women. There's been a real demand for women's ...
By whom. This is what it difficult. By whom? James, by whom? The problem is, when we talk about Afghanistan, to Afghans, we talk at Afghans, never with them. I watch the news that comes out of Afghanistan made by the people that is about the land they're from. I promise you, democracy was forced on to them. You mentioned a moment ago that success was achieved, and that terrorism, the threat of it was removed for a time. "Was".
We're back in that frame now, and this foolhardy attempt at withdrawing a troop - an offensive that could have been stopped by the Taliban does not need more troops on the ground, but it needs a commitment from the Western forces, and that is what we've been lacking.
You have family there still. What are you hearing from family and friends?
These aren't just spaces we see on TV when we're watching the News at 10. These are my Fry and friends. My uncle is in Afghanistan staying put told not to move for fear of being caught by the Taliban. I made a documentary on the BBC ten years ago with my family who talked in really negative terms about what the Taliban were.
My auntie out there is a teacher of a girls' school. We've just left them, holding a hot potato. We've left them to deal with it with a group that, over the last 20 years, have become calculating, have become smart, and decided and know how to work the propaganda game. This Taliban 2.0 is a propaganda scheme and asking the rest of the world is watching unfold while the Afghan people are yet again left holding ...
Man in the brown shirt.
(3) The exit was an American unilateral decision, so are we powerless or choose to follow blindly?
I'm going to go around the audience a little bit.
(4) I don't think, James, that you answered the question. The question was is what was the exit strategy? You clearly haven't answered that question. It seems to me there was no exit strategy that had any mindful bearing on what the Afghan people actually wanted or needed.
I will come back to you on that in a moment, James.
(5) Does Afghanistan have an appetite for democracy? Does it work out there? Can it fit in?
Afghans have an appetite for freedom, for justice, for fairness, for equality, for acceptance - all of the things that everyone in this room recognises.
Rita, let me come to you.
I think first to acknowledge that the entry strategy was flawed as well. It was absolutely right, as James said, after the 9/11 attacks, for the UK to want to respect that Article 5 of the NATO Agreement had been invoked, that we have a duty to come to the mutual aid of NATO member states that British citizens have been some of the second biggest victims of the 9/11 attacks outside of the United States, and that there was a real need to degrade the capability of Al-Qaeda, but those decisions were flawed in that there was no real understanding of the complexity of what then had to come next, and so this has long and deep roots. There have been a series of political and strategic failures over a very long period of time that led to here. To answer your question ...
Both on the left and the right, that is really important to mention.
And both sides of the Atlantic, I accept that, and it's really important to have a level of humility about that.
What are Labour's failings in this issue?
The decision to go in in the first place was taken when George Bush was in power on one side of the Atlantic and Labour was in power on the other. There are lessons that we are going to have to learn about the last 20 years in Afghanistan. We should not shy away from learning those lessons about the role that my party played, just as we should not shy away from learning the lessons that James' party has played as well.
To answer your question very directly, what we've seen unfold in the last few months was not inevitable, it was a consequence, as Rory said, by a decision of the United States to withdraw, which left the UK in a difficult position, and I acknowledge and respect that the decision by Joe Biden to put a firm end date of the withdrawal obviously to motivate the Taliban and give them a signal they could advance across the country. It had a huge impact on the morale of the Afghan forces as well and undermined the efforts that had been made to try to strengthen their resilience. If I could say this too: our government had 18 months to prepare - 18 months ago - in Doha, there was an agreement that the US would be leaving, and Joe Biden has always made clear that he would respect that agreement. To see these scenes at the airport, to see the Defence Secretary saying that now because of our failure to plan, people will be left behind, and they will die, this is unacceptable, and it is an unparalleled moment of shame for this government. [Applause].
Mehdi, let's hear the view from Washington.
I think the answer to the question why was there no exit strategy is because we were lied to. I mean, we were lied to from the very beginning. We were always told that Afghanistan was the good war, and Iraq was the bad war. You know what? Afghanistan had its own share of lies. We were told there was no alternative to going to war, even though it was reported at the time that the Taliban were willing to hand over bin Laden to a third country if Bush offered proof. Bush said no. The Taliban in 2001 offered to surrender as long as their leaders were kept safe in Kandahar, Donald Rumsfeld no, unconditional surrender. How did that work out? For 20 years, Obama, Trump, Blair, Brown, Cameron, May, Johnson - all lied to us. 20 years with turning the corner, "We're going to win, it's going well. Democracy's coming. The Taliban are on the run." What do we get for 20 years? 457 UK dead, 2,488 American dead, 47 Afghan dead civilians, 69 Afghans and police officers. At what point do we say enough is enough? We have to end this, but it has to end. I don't accept for region nationality. South Korea, we've not been experiencing a 20-year armed insurgency. We cannot have endless war mongering. Doing the same thing over and over again, and expecting different results.
You're massively misrepresenting the situation. Combat operations finished in 2014. You're living in the past. There have been very few US or UK casualties. This is one of the problems with the line that Biden is selling. Since 2014.
Why do you think it is, Rory?
Because we were conducting since 2014 air operations from bases in support of the Afghan national army. There was no significant pressure against our forces on the ground, they were never tested. This idea that Biden is selling, and that you're trying to sell, that we were still stuck in the middle of a bloody civil war, and we had no alternative other than to leave, is totally false to the millions of Afghans, the millions of Afghans whose lives have been improving over the last few years. You're much too pessimistic about what has been happening in Kabul. I don't know when you were last in Kabul. When were you last in Kabul? When I was in there in November I can assure you that people that I've been working with for 20 years are in a much better situation than they were before.
Let's hear the response from Mehdi.
First of all, the last US soldier died in February 2020. Do you know what happened in February 2020? Donald Trump signed a withdrawal agreement with the Taliban, this idea that you could stay in a stalemate Afghans made it easy for us to leave, according to the polls ... of the Afghans wanted them out as of last January. You talk about air operations. 330% increase in civilian casualties from our air attacks between 2017 and 2020. When you were in Afghanistan, Rory, did you go and talk to the families of the people we killed?
I do. And I can tell you one thing ...
Rory, just one minute. I need to bring other people in as well.
It's important to remember, as we talk as often we do in the West, we lob insults at each other, you did this wrong, United States, you did this wrong, Tories, Labour Party - frankly, from what I'm hearing from my colleagues and family in Afghanistan, we are sick of it. The deadliest year in this battle in Afghanistan was 2019 for the Afghan people. That's the year that most Afghans died. So to act as though, with respect to both of you, as though this is some sort of political game, as we've often heard, as a journalist myself, I've covered these stories, it's a political football that gets kicked from here to there, and the Afghan people pay in blood. [Applause].
A lot of hands up. Let's hear from our audience.
(6) So, one of the things that I wanted to ask is part of the entry strategy was to fight for the emancipation of women. What would you say to the 20 million people, 20 million women who have last their rights overnight?
Man there in the blue shirt?
(7) We all totally agree that what is happening right now is terrible, and it wasn't inevitable, but can't we all just agree that we totally underestimated the Taliban forces in the first place?
Their resilience, yes.
(8) It seems to be at any level a disaster and a tragedy, but for, from a reputational point of view, America, with their allies, like Great Britain, are going to police the world in the future, what lessons are going to be learned before we step foot in somebody else's land and try and nation-build in the way that we have in Iraq and Afghanistan? [Applause].
Let's hear from the woman in the front here in the blue.
(9) Coming back on some of these points here, we supposedly entered Afghanistan with a mission to implement democracy, a Western white version of democracy. I lived for a few years in the Middle East, as a child, but even as a child, it was quite obvious to me that the social, cultural, historical values bring forward a very different way of society working.
How on earth could you take one person's values and methods into a completely different country and expect it to work, and, when it doesn't, just walk away and brush your hands and go, "Oh, well, it didn't work, anyway, let's look after our very brave soldiers and service people" and not expect there not to be an enormous mess left behind? You've completely upended somebody's country, their social structure, their political structure - in some cases, their religious and cultural structure - and now we're just saying, "Oh, well, anyway, it doesn't seem to be working, let's go." At some point, people have to take responsibility for that. I don't care if it Labour, Conservative, British, American, who it is. We've gone in, we've made a mess. We have to take responsibility to that mess.
James, let me come back to you. A number of points have been put to you, a tall order to answer them all. A lady at the back said you didn't answer the original question: why have we failed the exit strategy? Boris Johnson said today in parliament it is not true to say the UK government was not prepared or didn't foresee this, it was certainly part of the planning. If this was the UK government prepared, what would have "unprepared" looked like?
I think the point specifically, to answer your specific point, Rita, is that once the Doha Agreement had been signed, once it was clear the United States were going to work to a timetable rather than a set of conditions, we started putting things in place. In April, we gave Foreign Office travel advice to tell British nationals to leave Afghanistan. We set up the ARAP scheme for interpreters, and other Afghans who had worked with British forces, Western forces.
In terms of the scenes we've just seen, James, because we only have an hour, Boris Johnson said today ...
Eadvantageses.
Eadvantageses were a set up two weeks ago.
In April, we set up the scheme to allow Afghan interpreters and similar people to leave Afghanistan. We've resettled over 3,300 people in that scheme and their families.
(11) don't carry on. Answer the question.
The plan to use air assault 16 brigade.
(12) this is rhetoric.
The question is why have we failed on the exit strategy. You feel we haven't failed?
I was explaining what the exit strategy was.
(14) how materially effective is that?
The time set by the decision he's of the American government.
(15) you carry on talking how materially effective has it become? If it was effective, we wouldn't be having this conversation today, we would? [Applause] How dare you! How dare you!
We ... the UK has repatriated a greater proportion of Afghan interpreters and support staff than any other coalition partner in the country.
(16) I'm not interested in any other.
The solution is not just to remove the brightest and the best of Afghanistan. The last time this happened, to your point: the last time this happened, I happened. I left the country I was born in, and I came here. And I'm a proud Brit. I'm a tax-paying citizen, I try to do good, I give to charity, I work in my civil community, I vote, I do all those things. But I could have done all of this where I'm from. I could have done of this in Afghanistan. So just to remove everyone that we worked with that that was the brightest and the best is not a total solution. All solutions should be on the table - I'm not saying they shouldn't - but moving a few thousand - 5,000, that's how many we expect to bring over the next year. What does that number mean? Does that satisfy anyone here?
We have a question on this. Let's hear from Bethany.
(17) So how many refugees should the UK accept from Afghanistan?
Has Labour put a number on this?
No, and one of the reasons we haven't put a number on this because it depends in part on the scale of the crisis about to unfold so we don't know what that is yet. We've said the government should make a big and generous offer, we said they should prioritise those people who are being targeted by the Taliban.
What does it look like?
Already their involvement with the UK and many of those people are in touch with us at the moment. They can't get through the roadblocks, can't get to the airport, even though the government is saying we will process your visa applications, they practically can't do it.
5,000 in the first year, up to 20,000, does that sound realistic? Is that number supported?
I'm really glad the government has changed tack from the weekend when they seemed to be suggesting they didn't want to offer any assistance at all.
That's rubbish.
Sorry, the Home Office was briefing the media that if the government offered assistance, more people would come, and that's why they were reluctant to do. Now, the Home Secretary had a different line this morning, and I'm really glad about that, but what she is proposing, let's be clear about this, is up to 5,000 in the first year. Up to 5,000 people, when we already know that the scale of this crisis is going to be way beyond that.
I want to pin you down. How many refugees?
I know ...
Not a number, but hear me out, could you at least say whether the government is on the right track talking about 20,000? Do you think it should be more than that?
I don't think they are on the right track for two reasons. One is that it is absolutely clear that 5,000 is too small a number over the next 12 months and we've got to make a more generous offer than that. The second reason I don't think this is sufficient is because what became apparent today is that there is absolutely no plan to deliver it.
The Home Secretary has not picked up the phone to any of the local authorities or mayors who have offered to take refugees. The funding for this looks it may come from the increase in the aid budget that the Foreign Secretary announced today, and what that does - this is the problem, and this goes to your point - is if we take money out of the aid budget that we're now trying to put back into Afghanistan, having taken it out in the last few years, if we take that money out in order to support refugees here, we are pitting people who can get out of Afghanistan against people who want to stay and be supported in Afghanistan, and, frankly, after the long history of involvement that the UK has, and the promises that we made to the Afghan people, we ought to be able to do both.
Rory, how many refugees should the UK accept from Afghanistan?
First fact: at the end of the Taliban period, there were 4 million Afghan refugees outside the country, to give you an idea of the scale of it, right? Those people mostly returned to Afghanistan when the Taliban left, which challenges this narrative coming out of Biden, and I'm afraid from other people, that somehow nothing improved in Afghanistan. Why did those people come back if nothing is improving? Second thing: too much of the debate here in Britain and the United States is focused on military interpreters. There are many, many other courageous Afghans, civil crypto currencies, people who have worked with our charities, journalist, human rights activists, teachers --
Are these people contacting you trying to get out?
Absolutely. I'm sure, my phone, and I'm sure everybody else here, is teeming with literally thousands of people coming through different methods trying to get out. People are genuinely terrified. At the moment, you cannot get to the airport. There are Taliban checkpoints all the way to the airport. The military won't let you in. The conditions set by the US and the UK are very narrow, and above all, the answer to this million international -- what the UK should be doing is working with other partners to share the burden. More than 40 countries were involved. If we share the burden, we can do this. It was done for the South Vietnamese boat people. It can be done for Afghanistan, but it cannot be done by individual countries offering 5,000 a year. [Applause].
There is a lot of talk of nation-building, and we think it's like a Lego system that we can pick up from Britain and implement in Afghanistan, like we thought with the military system, like we thought with this idea of governance, or giving -- forcing democracy down the throat of every Afghan, whether they wanted it or not. Nation-building by Afghans for Afghans is what all of you should be thinking about. [Applause].
Mehdi?
I want to come on to the refugees, I want to agree with Rory, about burden-sharing, given that Pakistan and Iran have millions of refugees. Let's remember where the majority have always been - not in the West. Rory made a dig about me not thinking things haven't improved. Of course I'm not denying things haven't improved in many areas over 20 years. I'm saying after 20 years, two trillion dollars and tens of thousands of people dead, clearly haven't improved enough, and the government collapses, politicians like Rory, and all politicians should begin any comment on Afghanistan with an apology first and then an explanation. On refugees, there are ... Afghans waiting to hear about their asylum applications. What will happen to them? I assume they will get leave to remain. Up until Monday morning the Home Office's official guidance said they could be returned to Kabul safely, which I find absurd. That needs to be changed. There are hundreds of "failed" asylum seekers from Afghanistan waiting to be deported to Afghanistan. The Home Office said they're on a pause. Don't pause it. I would like James Cleverly to give an assurance that not a single Afghan will be deported from the UK to any Taliban-run Afghanistan, that ought to be the first premise, the people who are already here and fearing for their lives.
I will get round the audience.
(18) Regarding the preparedness of this government, when all this took place, the Foreign Secretary and the Prime Minister were on holiday, sitting on the beach. I mean, it is incredible that that should be the case. I mean, how prepared were they that they felt it was okay to go on holiday, knowing, as you say, 18 months ago, the state was coming, this was going to happen, and this should have been organised? And, for them today, I was watching the debate in parliament, and Dominic Raab, finding it amusing when people are asking him questions about this. It is absolutely so disgraceful. They should hang their heads in shame. It is disgraceful. [Applause].
Man there in the blue sweater.
(19) The United Kingdom played a massive part in getting itself involved. For us to be talking about allowing only 5,000 people a year this is quite frankly disgusting. We should say our arms are open to whoever wants to come and whenever they want a safe return, they can have a safe return and support them in doing so. To say 5,000 a year is just ridiculous.
Man in the stripy top.
(20) Hi. The numbers, the numbers are a joke, and the idea that 5,000 a year, even if you take all of them, and they come tomorrow, 20,000 turned up tomorrow, I saw some numbers earlier today been that's one in every four villages - one person in every four villages and towns in the UK. Clearly, we can take more. At the most simple analysis of the situation, we are a major player in the last 20 years of this situation. Therefore, we should take a major stance in the clean-up, and in the recovery, so we should not be looking at numbers, it should be our percentage of anyone that needs the help, and that should be probably be in the tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, even, and it sounds like not only especially when you take into consideration the numbers issued by the government today what it is going to cost for those 20,000, which I think was less than £1 billion, and take into perspective in the last 18 months, we can find £1 billion, we can find ten, especially something our mess in the last 20 years.
(21) I feel at least with Rory, you know where you understand, you might not agree with it, he is saying troops should stay. I don't get Labour's position on this, and I don't understand the role that you played, Lisa, in terms of putting pressure on the government. I don't understand when I hear from you and Keir Starmer, I don't get a good feel. I haven't seen an impassioned, heartfelt speech in the - no doubt this evening. Where has that been in the last 18 months? You haven't been clear on your position and what pressure have you put on the government around the exit strategy?
This was put to you in the House of Commons today, according to the Hansard website, which records every word spoken in parliament, you have never said "Afghan" or "Afghanistan" in parliament. Given that, how have you been putting pressure on the government?
First of all, because this has largely been led by the Ministry of Defence. I'm the shadow Foreign Secretary not Defence Secretary. I've tabled a number of urgent questions to drag the Foreign Secretary to the House of Commons in order to answer questions about this, and they've never been granted. It in the government's gift how they control that. The only time that the Foreign Secretary has come to the chamber in order to make a statement about Afghanistan, it was in relation to aid cuts, and I don't shadow the aid brief, so one of my colleagues led for us on it, and led very well.
My colleague, John Healy, who is the shadow Defence Secretary, has raised this a number of times over the last few months, and I myself was in touch with Dominic Raab to try to get an urgent briefing over the summer to which he didn't even bother to reply to the email. We've since found out why, because it turned out that he was on holiday as the Taliban advanced. I would say this to you: don't make the mistake of thinking just because some of us recognise this is a complex and difficult situation that all of us need to own up to some level of responsibility for, no, just another ...
I have to ask the rest of the panel.
Sure. I've been directly challenged about our position on this. Let me just say this: we recognise the UK was left in a difficult position when the US took the decision to withdraw, and I make no apology for recognising that.
You've made that point earlier on.
I've been working with Afghan refugees since ...
I must get the rest of the panel in, or they do not get a fair share. James, the gauntlet ... the gauntlet was thrown down to you by Mehdi to guarantee that no Afghan who is currently here seeking asylum status would be deported back to Afghanistan.
Well, I don't know the circumstances around the reasons why someone might have been refused. One of the reasons why ... one of the reasons why we have put Foreign Office, Home Office, and Ministry of Defence staff forward into Kabul is to make sure that people who would wish to do us harm are not using the current circumstance to insert themselves into the UK. It would be a per investigation.
They just won a war.
If they were trying to protect Afghans in Afghanistan only to have those people who we know are going to be targeted. Women in female - female journalists, female politicians, women's rights activists, female educators: we know they're under high likelihood of being targeted for reprisals, and what we don't want to do is see that happen here on the streets of the UK. Yes, we do have to be careful. We are working at pace. As I said, we've already put a number of mechanisms in place to evacuate people who have worked directly with us. Rory's absolutely right: interpreters are not the only people that fall into that category. We have also now announced an additional, on top of that - an additional scheme for other Afghans who we know are going to be in a vulnerable position ...
Does that include my auntie ...
Because of the Taliban's ...
Does that include my auntie, James, who has taught in a girls' school in Afghanistan during the last Taliban invasion, and rule of the country ...
Quite possibly.
Because she has no hope tonight. I haven't been able to get through to her in two days, and my auntie has said things publicly against the Taliban, and she will be one of the first - as soon as this veneer of acceptability, because, let's be honest, the Taliban are worried in the next month or six weeks, there will be a NATO attack, some sort of land - there will be troops on the ground, so they're on their best behaviour.
They're absolutely abiding by all those rules. It could be a front. I hope it isn't, because at the end of the day, the Afghan people will win. As a refugee to this country in 1994 from Afghanistan, when this country took me in - and it did, and it gave me schooling, which it did, and it sent me to university, and I got a job, and I worked here as a journalist, a person, as a woman, and a person of colour talking to all you guys - this is a privilege beyond my grandmother's wildest dreams and imaginations. As a journalist my job is to report on the stories, and that is what I do with the films I make and such. When we talk about refugees, it seems like a blob, a hoard, a mass of people - *a hoard, a mass of people, we have a right to do better in our lives. Those that are deserving, this is what we are it, and some that don't, as though the Taliban are somehow going to, under a burkha sneak their way into this country and do us harm. We need to be careful of those kinds of aspersions.
Do you think there should be no limit?
I think the British people should be in control of how much. Immigration and refugees should not be something that happens to us, that is done to the British people, it should be done with us. [Applause].
Let's move on. I want to take another question.
(22). Thank you. With high casualties, both civilian and military, millions of people displace, trillions spent in no post-invasion stability, what was the war in Afghanistan actually for? [Applause].
Mehdi, I want to come to you first on this one. What was the war for?
I mean, I wasn't in favour, I definitely haven't been in favour of it over the last 20 years. I'm probably the wrong person to ask. I don't know what it was for. I know what we were told it was for. We were told that Afghanistan was the good war, Iraq was the bad war. Some of us were opposed to it from the very beginning. We thought it would be a Vietnam-style quagmire, tens of thousands of civilian casualties, thought the terror threat would go up and not down. I wish - I wish - we could have been wrong about all that. Sadly, those of us who warned about those things turned out to be right. We are in that position now where 20 years later we are wondering, was it worth it? What was it for? We know the metrics set down, some were met, some not met. Bin Laden was killed, ten years after we innovated in a whole other country. We were told the Taliban was toppled, yes, it was. But guess who is in charge of Afghanistan today, even more powerful and involved than before?
I do think we need to ask some hard, searching questions of ourselves. What was this for? What was the purpose of the war? How many lives were told to us? I would urge everyone watching to go to the Washington Post website and read the Afghanistan Papers, thousands of notes and memos, 400 officials, talking about how they knew this war was not winnable, they knew the country was falling apart, they knew the Taliban were stronger. That is the worst part about it, to see politicians this week saying, "I'm shocked at this collapse, shocked it didn't work out the way ... " They knew, they were discussing it amongst themselves that this Afghan army is not up to it, that there is corruption in the government, no-strike is not working, and they're not winning. They didn't tell the rest of us, a series of leaders on both sides of the Atlantic. This is a massive, massive monumental failure on a - people talk about Iraq. This is on the same level. 20 years? Thousands of lives lost? And now arguing about do we take 5,000 or 10,000. What we've done in Afghanistan seriously deserves a huge accounting. [Applause].
So the question from Sam is with high casualties, both civilian and military, what was the war in Afghanistan for? The lady in the red T-shirt.
(23) As one who deployed to Afghanistan about with the British military, I saw first hand some of the benefits of us being there and some of the negatives. I think at the time we knew we were not there to make a radical change to the situation in Afghanistan, but I think we could all hold our heads up high and say that we were seeing green shoots emerging, be that women's education, be that people in Afghanistan being able to live a peaceful and secure, and prosperous life. With the recent events, which I don't think have particularly come as a shock to anyone, those green shoots are now stone dead. The Afghans that I supported, I've heard have been executed in cold blood, the people that I served with, and who served on previous tours, who have lost friends, brothers, sons, sisters, are now seriously questioning what it was all for, and honestly, the only way that I can feel like I cannot be utterly embarrassed and humiliated about my service is if we as a democratic nation hold those responsible to this for account and have a full parliamentary inquiry that Boris Johnson is trying to weasel out of having, trying to pretend that we don't need one, where it holds to account both some of the political decisions, but also those in the military hierarchy who were responsible for strategic and operational decisions that have led to failure.
We saw this morning Nick Carter making the rounds of the breakfast television.
Brigadier Nick Carter.
(24) Quibbling whether the Taliban were the enemy, or even were the enemy. He is someone who has been in the top of the military hierarchy for many years. He bears responsibility for many of the failures. We as a nation need to accept that we have been defeated, and the generals responsible for that need to be held to account. James, will you assure me that people like Nick Carter will not be allowed to retire and go and work off the board of a private military contractor and live very well-remunerated lives, will at least have a moment where they are held in very, very humble silence for the decisions that they've made, and that is the only way as a veteran that I and my fellow veterans will feel at the very least we've learned something, so in 20 years' time, the next generation is not in some other country undergoing the same process? [Applause].
I should say, of course, that Nick Carter is not here to defend himself, to put his view, but James, you've been asked the question directly.
Well, first of all, thank you. I have been in the military for a long while - the reserve forces - I've never served in Afghanistan. Obviously, I know lots of people that have. I know people who have had life-changing injuries, and obviously, we, just as all the countries that contributed troops to Afghanistan, we've lost some of our brightest and best people, and that is obviously a huge sadness, and something of huge regret.
We will of course - we will of course need to look at all the phases of this operation, so there has been an inquiry in terms of the rationale around the original deployment. That kind of mid-term mission shift from the suppression of terrorism, through to capacity-building for Afghanistan, institutions, and what happened in most - what happened most recently in terms of our military support will of course be something that we look at.
(25) Just need an inquiry, a commitment to a full inquiry.
Will you give one?
I'm not able to give that commitment here and now, but obviously there is always - there is always an after-action review. You know what that is. This will of course happen with this. Everyone will be involved in the decision politically, militarily, diplomatically - everybody. Of course, it is absolutely understandable that this particular time, when we are seeing the images coming out of Afghanistan, veterans in particular will find it incredibly difficult, and it is completely understandable that people are frustrated, that they're angry, that they are depressed. I would put a strong plug to make sure that anyone that is feeling the pressure because of this reaches out, whether it be to former colleagues or to defence charities. And, of course ...
(26) To what mental health service would you ask them to go to? Our mental health service is shocking. Absolutely shocking. [Applause].
No, we have, we have, there are - there is a very strong network particularly of military mental health charities, and ...
(27) Charities, James!
And they -- they work closely with mental health services in the NHS.
(28) You haven't got a clue.
In the middle of this debate is a real natural political black and white thing. There are people like Mehdi saying the whole thing was doomed from the start, it was a total catastrophe, no good came out of it. Obviously, there were people in 2017, 2008 ...
Stop putting words in my mouth.
People saying in 2008, the whole thing was terrifically successful, we would build a Switzerland in central Asia. The truth of the matter from my experience is that there was a lot of improvement in terms of individual lives - not on the level of the state. The Afghan army never became self-sufficient. But I've made, Mehdi, with respect, 125 trips to Afghanistan over the last 20 years. I went into Kabul at the end of 2001. It was a ghost town. 300,000 people, nobody in the streets, 4 million refugees. We built a charity in 2006. I've got 400 employees on the ground at the moment. They are at risk from the Taliban because of an entirely unnecessary and reckless decision by Biden trying to emulate President Trump. We didn't need to do it, and what we've done is we've destroyed hundreds of thousands of lives.
People who are living lives similar to their opposite numbers in India, people who are able to go to school, and we were protecting it with a very small investment, and your figure, Mehdi, your figure, which you've quoted to suggest the only reason there are no casualties is because, at the beginning of 2020, a peace deal was signed, are completely misleading because you should be aware there were only six casualties in the year before that peace deal was signed. This has been a very low-cost, low-risk operation which - let me finish. Since you had a long rant about how the whole thing --
I don't want you to do a long rant, either, Rory.
We must get out of the black and white, either it was a disaster or it was brilliant. It was a poor, fragile country which was making huge progress, and we could have maintained that with a very modest investment, and we threw it away.
The question is what was the war in Afghanistan? Mehdi, I will come back to you. Forgive me. In fairness to Mehdi, he didn't say there hadn't been any improvement. That is not what he had said. What was the war in Afghanistan actually for?
The war in Afghanistan was fought to some degree for the children that I met when I was working at Newsround, and I got the opportunity to go back and make a film about the kids of Kabul. And I went to a place called Skater Stan, and I met young girls wearing their traditional Afghan clothes going up and down these huge skatepark that they had built because the war in Afghanistan gave a generation hope. That is what it gave. Bear with me. You can't kill hope. You can kill people. People have died, and they've lost their lives, and you've all been very honourable in the way you've expressed this, and Mehdi in Washington, DC. Those young girls are now young women who have aspirations and hope, and they will fight it. Images came out of Afghanistan yesterday with four women standing with A4 pieces of paper in a protest, these women who will be killed if the Taliban are what they are. Standing up protesting, today, in three different cities, people stood up and held the national flag of Afghanistan to tear down the flag of the Taliban. What does this say? It says the Afghan people are resilient. It is that they're hopeful. That is what you did. And I have a confused understanding of what this war in my birth land has achieved.
I look to Rory, and I nod, and I look to James, and I nod, to Lisa, and Mehdi, and what are you talking about? None of yous know what you're saying. That's what you did. You helped those four girls hold that poster up, and you helped a bunch of people hold a national flag of a national identity. I don't want to get soppy about it because the death falling from the skies falling from an aeroplane are still real, but it's a bittersweet thing. You must hold on to that.
You want to come back? [Applause].
(28) As you alluded to, there are pockets of anti-Taliban resistance, whether it is people on the street, people in Panjir Province. My question really is to those of you with political power: are we going to let them stand alone? Are we in the United Kingdom going to let them stand alone?
This is a really, really important point. I think, just because the situation now is tragic, and because we didn't achieve everything that we wanted to achieve, it doesn't mean to say we achieved nothing, and we did achieve a generation of young women who have had the opportunity to learn, and we do absolutely need to work to protect those gains, and fragile as they are, and that means working with the countries in the immediate vicinity around Afghanistan, that means working with countries that have a degree of influence over the Taliban. That is about making it absolutely clear that we are not just going to walk away from applying leverage, and applying pressure, and trying to make this situation as good as it can be.
Let me bring in Lisa. Lisa has not had a chance to answer this question. The question is higher casualties, trillions spent, what was the war in Afghanistan for? This is the war that Labour supported.
It's impossible to look at the situation that is unfolding in front of our eyes and think this is anything other than a catastrophe. Having said that, those mistakes that have been made, the very many mistakes, including the failure to plan for what came next after our exit strategy, which we have raised repeatedly in the House of Commons, and with ministers over recent months, those failures were political and strategic. They were not the failures and mistakes of the very many people led by Afghans themselves, with British troops supporting them, with humanitarian and aid workers from all over the world, including Afghanistan supporting them, and here in the UK, and the very many diplomats and staff and civilian contractors who worked as well, to deliver benefits that so many panellists have talked about. The clearance of land-mines, which nobody has mentioned, which gave a dramatic boost, not just to the safety of people in Afghanistan, but to the economic prospects of people in Afghanistan as well.
Yes.
I would hate for anybody, particularly those of you who bravely and rightly stood up for our country and stood alongside Afghans and helped to deliver those gains, to come away with the sense that we are anything other than absolutely proud of those achievements and determined to do everything that we can in these most difficult of circumstances to defend them. There is a generation of young Afghans that grew up with a transformation in what they could expect from their futures. They learned languages, they studied all over the world, they took those skills back to Afghanistan, and put them to good use making a contribution, and they got access to education. Millions of them - girls, who never would have had it before. They're watching the future unravel in front of their eyes. We owe it to them not to engage in a counsel of despair, but to think what can we do right now to assert leverage over the situation and protect those gains.
We have to be reasonably brief, this is a question a lot of you asked. Matthew Goodwin-Freeman?
(30) As Kabul fell, the Prime Minister said nobody wants to see wants to see Afghanistan become a breeding ground for terror. In truth, won't the situation in Afghanistan now mean members of the public here in the UK are more at risk of terrorism and extremist acts?
James?
Well, there is of course that risk. This is why the UK's position had always been that we withdrew when certain conditions had been met, rather than to a specific date or timeline. We are going to have to work very, very closely. We're going to have to work closely with countries in the immediate vicinity around Afghanistan, and some of those countries are countries that we have a very difficult set of relationships with, including Iran, for example. But none of those countries want to see Afghanistan turn into a terrorist breeding ground. It is going to be incredibly hard work, and it will require a degree of focus and attention, but we are absolutely committed to make sure that we put in that diplomatic work in Afghanistan, and we are deeply, deeply suspicious of the promises made by the Taliban, both in Doha and most recently, but we will judge them on their actions rather than their words, and we will work with the countries in the region, both the immediate neighbours and those in the near vicinity, who also have a vested interest in Afghanistan not returning to terrorism.
The former head of MI5 said the Taliban will inspire and embolden more the wish to commit Jihad against the West. Rory Stewart, are we more or less secure now?
We're less secure. This is an immense victory for Jihadists, coming before the anniversary of 9/11, and we gave it to them - totally unnecessary, light presence, and we decided to hand this enormous victory to the Jihadists. President Biden believes by leaving he's ending the forever wars, ending the global war on terror. What he's just done is to to do something similar to what happened in Syria in 2013/14. He's probably extended this war on terror by another decade through a single unnecessary shameful betrayal of the Afghan people.
Lisa Nandy?
I agree with Rory that we are far less secure than we were even on Saturday, and that is a real problem. And I was surprised today in the House of Commons, when the Prime Minister made quite a lengthy statement to the House about our strategy, that this only warranted two sentences in his reply. It ought to be a priority.
There are two things the government should do very quickly. The first is about intelligence. The government appears to have been relying on intelligence up to now that said that the Taliban were unlikely to advance, and that the Afghan government had the resilience to hold out. That clearly was completely and utterly wrong. We need to get a line of sight on what is happening beyond Kabul, because, at the moment, we don't have any understanding as far as I can work out about what is happening on the ground, and that means working with our partners to share intelligence, and get that line of sight. But the second thing that the government ought to be doing is they ought to be exerting what limited leverage we've got on the Taliban, and this is a painful place to be; this is an unpalatable prospect, and this is a difficult scenario we don't want to be in. Unless we start going after, for example, the financial assets of the Taliban, they've taken over the Afghan government's assets, some of those may be in UK banks. Why aren't we freezing the assets? Why aren't we working with partners to impose sanctions? Unless we start putting leverage on the Taliban in order to put pressure on them not to allow Afghanistan to descend into a haven for terrorists, we will reap the benefits.
Starve them out. There is a Covid pandemic.
Nobody is suggesting the Afghan people -- nobody is suggesting that you should punish the Afghan people.
But how else will you help them?
From a regime that has come to power through violent means and displaced the government.
Any money going into the country, and the Taliban have barely got ten days of money left.
That is absolutely not what I was suggesting.
I understand your statement about not wanting to fund the Taliban.
But we should be getting assistance directly to the Afghan people.
How?
The United Nations have a position on the ground.
Because the Taliban allow it.
All the children ...
Lisa Nandy, let Nelufar speak.
Everybody should be on the table. Ten days ago, the idea of talking to the Taliban was utterly unimaginable. Today, whether you want to do it via Qatar, or via the UAE, you have to directly or indirectly engage with them.
You're creating a division where none exist. This is one of the few areas where there is a cross-party consensus between us and the government. There has been an engagement with the Taliban for quite some time.
I need to let Mehdi in before the programme is over. Mehdi, are we more or less safe?
To answer the question, we are less safe, but that's not because of the way the war ended, it's because of the failed war itself - 20 years of failures. James mentioned earlier we are safe after Afghanistan. We invaded Afghanistan in 2001, the 7/7 bombings happened in 2005, four years after our invasion. Terrorist groups have havens across the world, Yemen, Libya, Iraq, all countries we were militarily involved in in some shape or form. Rory mentioned earlier only six people died in Afghanistan in 2019 - he's talking about US troops. It was a horrific year for Afghan civilians. In the first year of 2019, first six months, the US allies killed more people than the Taliban. That is a shocking statistic. We killed more civilians than the Taliban. That does not act as a recruitment arrangement for terrorist groups? That doesn't embolden terrorism sitting in a Muslim country for 20 years, killing civilians intentionally or unintentionally? All the war on terror has given us is more war and more terror, and we need to change tack and stop indefinite occupations.
(30) War is terror. It is the most nonsensical thing I've heard in my life. War is terror. Here we are 20 years on in this particular conflict. We could be talking about Iraq tonight, Libya, or Syria. The reality is as much as there may be terrorists out there, actually, the people who blew up the tube in 7/7 in 2005, they were from Leeds where I live. The person who blew himself up in Manchester was from London. They are in this country right now. The reality is that there is no one place on this earth where there is terrorism going on. It goes on all around the world. You cannot defeat an ideology from dropping bombs from 30,000 feet. [Applause].
(31) Thank you for your service by the way, and all my friends in the forces. With its thirst for a unilateral agenda change, should not look at our special relationship and lead to these humanitarian crises in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, and Afghanistan, and welcome now, obviously.
What do you think of what you've heard?
(31) The fact is that we are not looking at what is going to happen here in the UK. Because Labour's Defence Secretary said just hours ago that some of that 20,000 will be from the Taliban. So when we say that the Taliban aren't going to put on a burkha and coming over here, Labour are saying that they will, and it is children going to the Manchester Arena, commuters on the 7/7 buses, students on London Bridge, us communities, who are killed, who get attacked by terrorists coming over here, and Labour's inability to put ... I agree, I agree. Labour's inability to put a stance on what it will do to protect communities here shows that you haven't changed from sitting on the fence like Jeremy Corbyn.
Sorry, that's just not ...
(32) Jeremy Corbyn wasn't against the Taliban war.
We've been pushing a strategy to protect the - I'm a Greater Manchester MP, we are going through hell in Manchester with the inquiry into the Manchester bombings. Please don't tell me we don't take people's security and safety here in the UK seriously. The gentleman made a point behind you, that this is not just a foreign-policy issue, this is not just something that people in far away countries do for people here. This is a home-grown problem, and we need to work together to deal with it.
We're out of time. We could go on for some time, having a live audience back, what a difference that makes. My goodness. Our hour is up.