Is the cloud of questions currently surrounding Boris Johnson's improper behaviour tittle tattle or a real scandal?
You have asked the question what do you think?
I think it's a real scandal. I think it's probably the tip of a very large iceberg, and I think he could clearly issue up very quickly if he chose to be transparent and honest, and the fact he is not being suggests he is concealing something more. It's a real shame. It attacks the democratic process. Voters can only vote confidently if they feel certain they are getting honest and reliable information. Jon?
I totally agree with Alex. It is a scandal! The reason why these questions are continuing to circulate is because Boris Johnson has failed to provide a full and Frank explanation as to who paid for the lavish upgrade of his Downing Street flat.
Of course he says that he has paid for it. The question is who paid for it initially?
Indeed, indeed. This matters. It matters I believe for two reasons. First it matters in its own right, because we as politicians should be held to higher standards, and we should stand for principles of honesty, and integrity, and it's not good enough to say, oh this is just typical Boris Johnson, we know he lies, we know he plays fast and loose, it's just the way he is. That isn't good enough.
If we think it is we are really descending as a society. But the second reason why it matters is because somebody did pay initially for this. Somebody either put a donation through Tory Party head office, or loaned the money to Boris Johnson, and when Boris Johnson is the most powerful politician in the land, we need to know who is potentially buying influence! We need to know who he is beholden to. We need to know when he received this loan, when he paid it back, why he didn't declare it.
It's not good enough just to say, well he has paid for it and the taxpayer didn't, if this donor is winning contracts from the Government, if this donor is winning taxpayer contracts like we have seen with donors over PPE, and ultimately, we are all paying for it because they are getting something back. It cannot be one rule for Boris Johnson, and something for the rest of us, we do need everything out in the open now because otherwise, this scandal won't go away.
Anne-Marie?
I disagree with that. I think it is an opportunity to make this shift and the Prime Minister was very clear yesterday at Prime Minister's questions that he has paid for those costs for the upgrade of his flat.
He didn't answer the question that was put to it who paid for it initially?
He has said he paid the bill.
The question was initially?
I can't offer you an answer
You don't know either?
I haven't had a personal discussion with him on this I haven't seen him. He has been clear he has paid for it. What's important is here somebody said there's so many different ways ministers are held to account. There are in a number of ways and rightly so the systems exist to make sure that as Jon says that we live to the standard that our voters expect, and the Electoral Commission has decided to look at the Conservative Party's finances and that's fine and how it should be. The Prime Minister has been clear he will indeed if there's a requirement to provide any documentation that's required. He has also don't clear...
Why not answered the question of who initially paid for it, he must know.
I think he has answered the question.
Why has he not answered the question of who initially?
I'm comfortable with the fact he said it has been paid for out of his pocket that's fine and should there be alternatives that the Electoral Commission needs to investigate he said he is happy to provide any documentation that's required. Indeed he has also been very clear that officials have made sure all the way through that everything was fine and I'm very comfortable with the Prime Minister's answer.
There's lots of hands up let's hear from some of our audience Hannah?
It's the -- we are saying he said he has paid for it, but again like you have said, he hasn't said who initially paid for it. Did he always intend to pay for it, that's the thing. Was this -- he saw as a way of cash for access as we have seen with Cameron? And lobbying, we have had that very recently. There's no, there hasn't been a clear answer. Can you say that there has because he said he has covered the cost, but when he covered that cost, and did he actually anticipate covering that cost when the money was originally spent. I don't think that's been answered at all.
Sherry?
I'm interested to know why er... well firstly, um... who made the accusation, and why was it taken so seriously in secondly even if he didn't pay for it straight away, we all buy stuff on buy now pay later, why shouldn't he?
Will?
I think for me, this is just the tip of the iceberg at the moment. You know, since Boris has been in power it seems to be scandal after scandal and legality aside whether it's legal or not, it's just the moral issue. I think he just treats the public with disdain. I think he has got to stop.
Danny?
Look, it's not for me to say whether you know, to pass judgment on this matter but I do know from our experience at Oxfam about how important transparency is, you know, the only way that we have made progress in recent years across the world has been to bring in much higher standards of openness and transparency, and you know, for many people in this country, the hope is that we will come out of this pandemic, you know, this huge shock to our nation, building back fairer because we will create a fairer better society, and an equally important part is to build-back institutions that people can once again trust. I think it's really important, not just on this issue, but a number of other issues we have seen recently that we see politicians go over and above when it comes to transparency.
Tim? You have been listening and shaking your head a bit I noticed.
Laughter. On the one hand, it's Number 10's fault because it won't answer that question of who initially paid for it. When it doesn't do that, that opens the possibility to speculation.
Why do you think they are not answering the question? At Number 10?
Sorry?
Why are they not answering the question?
Presumably because the answer is embarrassing that's the only reason why they don't give it. I don't know why they don't give it. Everyone has assumed that there's something underneath the iceberg. I'm not sure there, and it's worth bearing in mind that lots of politicians have charged the taxpayer to redecorate residences in this instance the Prime Minister has paid for it himself. It's also worth bearing in mind that the original blind trust idea he is reported to have come up with is how parts of the US presidency is financed at the White House, it's not internationally ununusual at all. The thing with Boris Johnson is people voted for him knowing he doesn't do things the normal way. He is an unusual character. But they wanted that! They wanted someone who cut through what they regarded as a stagnant, frozen political system to get things done. What Boris Johnson will be saying in the run-up to the all-important Hartlepool by-election is I got us out of the EU and I rolled out a world-leading vaccine programme.
Judge me not on the character assassinations but on the basis of what I got done. Think back to when we were run by someone who dotted all the i's and dotted the ts and did everything to the letter, Theresa May, her Government was a disaster. So lots of voters are going to judge whatever has happened and it's purely speculative, they voted for Boris Johnson to get certain things done, he has been getting them done, and they don't really care how he pays for the wallpaper.
Martin you are agreeing let's hear what you have got to say?
Hi. Yes. Do we really care? I think the general public, they are well aware of Boris Johnson and his failures. I think Jonathan has to be careful because all politicians are tarred with the similar brush, and kind of reeks of the expenses scandal.
Dave?
Pause. Three words come to mind, honesy, integrity, and transparency. Danny has mentioned transparency. It's very difficult, and I agree with Martin as well. At the end of the day, you know, everybody needs to be accountable. Everybody needs to be transparent. We expect a certain amount of moral standing with politicians in one sense, but in another, we don't. It's a strange situation because we know that there are back-handers going on. We know there's all sorts of different aspects to politics which as a person you know, a UK citizen, I'm fully aware, and I'm not aware of all the backhanders that go on, and all the inside conversations.
So you expect politicians to behave badly?
Expectation is different. I think I don't expect politicians to be -- to behave badly, but I think the majority of the population unfortunately would probably assume that in some way or another, politicians are there not only to represent themselves, but, and you know, the population, but also to go that little bit too far you know. Yes, it's a difficult one.
So Daisy, it's a bit depressing listening to what Dave is saying and Labour are trying to make headway with this against the Government. Not everybody but a number of people there saying come on does it really matter, and we don't expect much from the politicians?
It is depressing. Some of us came into politics to make a difference. Actually the biggest shame of this story is that the Prime Minister and his team have spent every single day this week trying to paper-over this story, and cover-up the source of funding for a flat refurb whilst at the same time pushing-through the fire safety bill in Parliament which is leaving thousands, hundreds of thousands of innocent leaseholders without any financial.
Sticking with the subject a minute. Sticking with this subject a minute. In terms of the headway that you are making, part of the reason Boris Johnson is talking about this every day is because you won't let it go, I'm not saying whether you are right or wrong but you don't seem to be making headway. To the people out there so Dave and Martin and Colette was shaking her head and thinking this subject doesn't really matter that much, how can you convince people like that that this does matter.
This anomaly has only just appeared and there's clearly time for the story to run. It should matter. The election commission which is a financial regulator sees the evidence and they think there are reasonable grounds to investigate this. That is a very serious matter and the public are reserving judgment to see what comes out. People should worry Downing Street could have come clean at the start of this week. They have refused to do so. We know the Prime Minister has appointed a so-called independent investigator but the Prime Minister himself can veto the publication of that investigator's report. He is hardly independent at all. The point I was trying to make is this is a real scandal and the real scandal of this story is that hundreds of thousands of leaseholders this week will be left without any financial protection for remediating fire safety defects and cladding on their flats whilst the Prime Minister and his team are concerned about papering-over a story about how he has refurbished his flat.
Daisy is right. The country is in crisis. In my Leicester constituency, I have businesses who are struggling, and people who are losing their jobs. We have got thousands across the country sleeping on our streets. We have child poverty increasing and children going hungry. They don't have access to the Prime Minister in the way in which presumably wealthy donors have had access, and have tried to buy influence because they are funding his decoration, and his wallpaper, bedding and linen and sofas and goodness knows whatever else, and Tim says with respect, you say the British public voted for that, as if that's great! Well, maybe. Maybe they did. Maybe they did. Maybe it won't play out in the opinion polls. But I actually think it's important to fight for the values of integrity, honesty, and transparency in politics. That is why the Prime Minister should come clean, and explain every bit of this. All the ins and outs.
Both of you have described this as a distraction I agree, why are you banging on about it?
It's about integrity. It's important
Sorry you are levelling allegations which we haven't got to yet because we still don't know the answer to the question of who originally paid for it. If there's a suggestion, if there's a suggestion and there's an uncomfortable relationship between private capital, and the Government, that has gotten worse in the past year, I don't disagree with you. It's a function of the lockdown, it's a function of our pandemic response and the amount of money that we have spent of which there has been no control because Britain has taken the attitude of we will spend whatever it takes in order to procure the medical equipment and vaccines to give you one example. In the course of pursuing Test & Trace the Government signed over 600 contracts and with over 2,000 consultants one of which charged 6, 000 plus per day. Britain has been leaking money for the last year. That's worth talking about! That's worth an inquiry. How much the Prime Minister personally paid for his wallpaper is a distraction.
But who paid for it. Who made the donation is not a distraction. It is not a distraction. There's a reason why politicians have to declare donations, have to declare loans because people need to see that we are acting in the public interest, not in the particular interest of the donors and those who are funding our lifestyles, so it is not a distraction, it's about integrity and honesty in politics and I still think that's worth fighting for.

A lot of commentators pose this as an either or issue. Government should be getting on with the crisis or we are distracted but we need both. We need urgent action on the issues that matter and we need transparency. This country we have had the Nolan principles for standards in public life for 25 years because it's a well established principle that you can't have a high functioning democracy without trust. And without transparency. For me, it's got to be both!
OK.
We have that because the Electoral Commission is investigating that. I'm asking us pretty please not to pre-suppose that we know the answers. Also don't assume bad faith and the original plan was a blind trust that doesn't necessarily equal buying access. It is done in other countries.
I am going to move on. We could talk about this for some considerable time. You have been sitting there quietly Anne-Marie.
I made the point and we have many ways to look at this and get the transparency.
No less than
That's what we will have and then all know the answer.
No less than three inquiries and let's hope we get the answer.
Another question from Natalie.
Given that the fire safety bill has now passed through Parliament without any protection for leaseholders, what can be done right now to prevent the financial ruin of people who are facing unaffordable bills?
Now, Natalie I know because you have been on the programme before as part of our QT50 audience that you are in a predicament. Explain to us your situation.
So, unfortunately I am trapped in a building at the moment that has unsafe cladding. It's non-ACM cladding but I'm not able to sell, I'm not able to move on from my home until that's remediated. I potentially face the bill for tens of thousands of pounds to put right this issue unless you know, I'm actually protected legally.
Has anything the Government done so far in terms of the bill that was passed today or the -- which is for five billion pounds and for buildings above 18 metres the developer has to pay. For buildings lower the leaseholders have to pay with loans. Is any of that helping you?
The Government have made available the non-ACS fund. It's very limited in scope. It covers very specific types of cladding and the key thing is fire doesn't discriminate. It's a lot more than just cladding and there's a lot of fire safety defect that these buildings have. It's actually come out that basically these buildings haven't been fit for purpose for such a long time. It's now all coming out, and the Government don't seem to be willing to step-up and do the right thing, and actually protect people's lives because ultimately this is a safety issue. If I went out tomorrow and bought a toaster I would have more legal protection on that toaster than I have had on my biggest purchase that I have put my life savings into.
What is the value at the moment?
Zero. This is the thing at the moment. I can't get a valuation on my home. Until the cladding is fixed and we have got an external survey which seems a long time off I'm going to be trapped here in a value-less home that I have put my life savings into.
Anne-Marie, the Government has managed to get a bill through today, but talk to Natalie, it's not helping her?
So. First of all, you know, I think this has been such a big scandal and one that the Government has wanted to get to grips with you know, understand the extent of the challenges, and I think the fire safety bill that has gone through today as you say Fiona is the starting point and it's that commitment.
How can you help Natalie there now. This has been going on for some time since Grenfell and Natalie is stuck.
Absolutely. The five billion fund is that starting point to make sure that we can start to get to grips with this. It is a huge you know, logistical exercise as you know, we know the extent of the cladding that isn't fit for purpose, but I hear absolutely the point you make which is of course, it is more than that, the challenge is with fire doors and all the access points and those issues. This is you know, this is a scandal that we are going to have to unravel. But I hope very much that the initial stages are going to be a starting point. I think that is the challenge with a number of these things is (A) understanding the scale of the problem which took us a while to get a full picture across the country. And to find the right tools to help move that forwards. I think this is a very difficult challenge. I feel enormously for Natalie I hope very much this is a starting point for solutions.
When Boris Johnson says no leaseholder should have to pay for the safety defects that they did not cause, you have Natalie there who is facing exactly that when it comes to perhaps not the cladding but other things like fire breaks, combustable balconies, sprinklers and did he just not mean it when he said that?
He did. And the fire safety bill is the first stage, and the fund to help get to grips with the complexity and enormity of this scandal that we have to help to unravel but, I don't for a moment deny this is a big challenge to deal with, and there's a huge amount of work to be done, both in you know, physical change, and working out where those challenges are. I hope you know very much that we will be able to support Natalie and many others in the weeks and months to come.
This is a fund you were keen to bring up?
The impact of the bill going through for people like Natalie and the hundreds of thousands of leaseholdsers is devastating. I was on the committee last summer I joined the committee that was scrutinising this piece of legislation. I introduced the principle that leaseholders should not have to pay for fire safety defects that are not of their making, and Liberal Democrats have stood with leaseholders from the very start to the very end and last night we were the ones who pushed the amendment again.
We made it clear to the Government that every single leaseholder affected would have preferred for that bill to have fallen last night than for it to pass into law. This bill has now passed into law. Leaseholders who have already received enormous bills for 50, 60, 70, 000 pounds are now possibly going to receive even more bills, possibly in a matter of days! They cannot afford to pay it. They are trapped.
Who do you think should be paying that bill do you think the Government can put the onus on the leaseholders or the Government therefore the taxpayer who pays it?
I introduced the principle ten months ago. Ten months ago. For ten months, the Government has refused to come up with a system to sort this out. It's on the Government for not coming forward with the system. I support what the cladding action group is calling for which is the Government should stump up the money in the first instance to remediate and make these homes safe they are fire traps. They are death traps. It is outrageous that almost four years on from the Grenfell tragedy we think it's OK for people to live in these kind of places.
The Government should touch up the cash and put in a system to get as much of that money back as possible from the people responsible. Leaseholders need to know they are protected. They can't afford to pay the bills. They are stuck in death trap flats. Some are facing bankruptcy and homeless. Some of them who are not bankrupt yet may invalidate their legal qualifications and ruin their careers. This is a national scandal. The Government has had ten months to come up with a solution. They have refused to do so!
Tim?
I agree. This really is a scandal. Grenfell was in 2017 and it was a man-made disaster! And, as well as the people directly involved in it, it has also had a terrible lot of repercussions for others. People have found themselves not just living in unsafe accommodation but as a result financially stuck, unable to move out, unable to do anything facing extraordinary costs. What the Government has thus far offered has been a mixture of grants and loans and some of them preceding very slowly isn't enough to meet that. The Government has, I'm afraid I agree in the first instance it's gots to cough up the cash, as the Lib Dems say it then needs to claw it back from the private contractors who in most cases are the people responsible for this scandal.
We also need to know precisely what accommodation is safe and isn't safe. We need to see that which is not safe improved immediately because distress, and to finish by repeating, and it's not a financial problem, it's that technically people are living in unsafe accommodation. That should not be allowed to happen.
Colette?
So, there's a couple of things here. I mean, who is liable for this? I mean, poor Natalie, if she had a fire now, is she insured? Why is it four years, and what is it going to take to get somebody to do something about this and make sure these buildings are safe for people to live in. Four years, and we don't know which ones are safe yet. Why should the leaseholders be left with this bill? It should predominantly be the contractors or actually, the planning departments and safety departments that pass these off? Somebody somewhere has to take responsibility for this, and it should not be the leaseholder. Why are the insurers in this?
Jo?
I would like to go back to Anne-Marie, and you have alluded that this is the first step in a measure of steps that the Government are going to take. I would like to know what those next steps might be, and how that could maybe offer reassurance to the people that are currently living in fear and are in financial hardship.
I think Grenfell is nearly four years ago, and I think the Government has had four years to consider the position to gather the data, to consult with industry experts, to perhaps come forward with some suggestions in a road map. Whilst I understand this does offer some relief, evidently it does not resolve the problem. It leaves many, many people in a very hopeless and desperate situation. Perhaps you could tell me your thoughts on the road map.
When it be resolved for someone like Natalie, and where she's not going to have to be stumping up for these things, and she's living in unsafe accommodation?
That's the challenge Government has. What's the answer? I can't give you the detail of the plan but
If you know this is the start you must have some idea what's coming next?
What I see, and you know, the way you know, any great challenge is tackled is there's been the huge amount of analysis to work out how big the problem is, it is indeed much larger than perhaps was initially understood, and the challenge is with this first, with the bill, to set this in place and the fund to help and move that forwards. There's an ongoing challenge. There's obviously the work that's been done to make sure that you know, cladding is now safe, that we aren't going to be using the sort of unsafe cladding that was there.
This is a long way to go on that?
I think that's right, this is the really big challenge. It is a huge challenge, and you know, dealing with
So the answer is in the nicest way you don't know, not saying that to be mean? And you are doing -- and answer your question. Can't answer.
I can't but without doubt this is going to continue request we are going to have to keep working on it to make sure we get to a point that everyone is able to be remediated.
Let me just I need to get round the panel. Jon?
Listening to Natalie, the fact you have been so let down is unforgiveable, and thank you for speaking to openly and bravely, and I know there will be many leaseholders who feel the same and don't have the confidence to come out on television and speak about their personal circumstances. Thank you for what you have done. I agree with Daisy, and with Tim, having disagreed with Tim on the last I agree with him on this one. Now, I lead for the Labour Party on health, I have not been involved in the particulars of the Bill. I will speak more broadly and say, as it happens, I was on Question Time the week of Grenfell, and the panel and the audience were united in grief.
We were united i determination that something like that should never happen again! I just find it utterly bewildering that here we are four years later, and this still has not been resolved in a satisfactory way. The bill that has gone through Parliament has clearly been a hugely-missed opportunity. It's simply not fair for leaseholders through no fault of their own to be facing not only this great expense, but the ongoing fear of what might happen to them and their children, and their families should something horrific go wrong. This clearly needs fixing as soon as possible.
Danny?
My heart goes out to Natalie and the hundreds of thousands of people who will be disappointed by this news today and probably angry. I want to step-back a little about the fear Jo talked about. Up and down our country, there are people, hard working people, who are living in fear about their financial security, you know, we have carers, and we clapped our carers. Yet the majority of carers in this country are living in poverty. We haven't addressed child poverty and talked enough about free school meals. The issue after issue we are sleepwalking into a poverty crisis. One in five British people were living in poverty before this pandemic.
This isn't necessarily a poverty crisis. This is people, and not speaking for everybody but people who have been able to afford to buy their own homes and found themselves in a position where they may be forced into penury but they aren't in it because of a poverty crisis.
We know that more people fell into poverty. If you take each of the issues and lay it upon each other, the insecurity that people feel that will drive more people into poverty.
OK. Let's take another question now from Tim.
Hi. With Covid cases and deaths in India continuing to increase, is the British Government doing enough to support India?
Daisy?
No. I don't think the UK Government is doing enough to support India. I know the UK Government has sent medical supplies but we absolutely vitally need the Government to do is to send vaccines. So back in February, the Liberal Democrats wrote to the Government and said after the first four million most vulnerable people in the UK have been vaccinated, we think that the Government should embark on a parallel roll-out of the vaccine through the UK and through Kofax which is the international vaccine scheme.
When you say the first four million do you mean to the age of 50? Sooner?
The first four million which was the first four or five cohorts. We are way beyond that now. The situation we have is that none of us are safe until all of us are safe! For as long as people in India cannot get the vaccine, not only will loads of people die but it also means that the virus will mutate again and that will turn up into other strains that will wash-up on our shores. It is both the morally right thing to do, and also a self-interested thing to do to make sure that we get this parallel roll-out. Norway is doing it, the US is sending vaccines but at the moment the UK Government has not yet committed to sending vaccines to India.
The US is sending vaccines it's not using.
We need lots of countries to be sending vaccines to India. What we think the Liberal Democrats think, is that the Government should be enrolling on this parallel roll-out of the vaccine. We know that with all the vaccines that have been ordered, we have a surplus in the UK, and so we could actually embark on this parallel roll-out where we are vaccinating our own population whilst also senning some vaccines through the Kofax international scheme as well. As I say it's morally the right thing to do and it's self-interested. For as long as we don't vaccinate people, they will die and the virus will mutate and wash up on our shores.
Danny I'm interested in your perspective as head of Oxfam GB, and can you see, there would be some who would not take Daisy's view, and think I want to get myself vaccinated first before I start sending vaccines abroad.
First we need to recognise how devastating what is going on in India. This is not a wave, this is a tsunami, and many experts said it was a question of when not "if" we would see these impacts. We have seen it in Brazil, and South Africa and now in India. There's a debate about excess stock. We believe the real answer lies in not fighting about the pieces of the vaccine pie, but making the pie bigger! What we are calling on the UK Government to do is to ease the intellectual property rules around who owns this vaccine technology, who owns the vaccine recipes, you know...
Rather than do what Daisy is suggesting after the first four million start sending vaccines abroad?
Do both. But the substantial difference is going to be made when we allow other manufacturers, countries, to safely manufacturer these vaccines, the US Government has said it's considering this seriously but, in the world trade organisation negotiation so far, our Government has blocked those sorts of moves. Yet we are talking about for example, the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine is 97% funded by us, the public, the taxpayers.
And also it's being sold at cost.
Yes but we are putting the interests of a few big pharmaceuticals above the interests of people around the world, and you know, the more this vaccine you know, rips through countries like India, the more chances it will mutate, and the less effective the amazing remarkable progress we have made here in this country with vaccination will be. So, as Daisy says, no-one is safe until everyone is safe. The best way to do that is to loosen the rules on who owns the right to produce those vaccines.
Can you see the Government doing that?
So interestingly, when I was Secretary of State for DFID last year I was the one
Department for International Development
Yes now merged int Foreign and Commonwealth development office. I worked with G AR VI the vaccine alliance. We raised 8. 8 billion dollars for them last year over a billion more than was our target, so they would then also be able to help get going on a vaccine programme to help developing countries if and when a vaccine which at the time seemed like a very long way off, something that was possible, we then worked with the WHO to set up Kofax so we could find a way to harness exactly as everyone is saying, the ability for G AR VI to be able to deliver into those countries vaccines as and if, it felt like it, there was a vaccine coming.
In terms of what Danny is saying there's a loosening of property rights, what would you say?
That's across the world. So interestingly with Oxford AstraZeneca, they made a commitment upfront that 300 million doses would feed Kofax, and we have now invested 548 million into Covak and it's been match-funded by other donors so it has a billion pounds to work with. Part of its purpose is to be able to buy vaccines at cost and ensure that there can be that shared production both for developed countries who are buying it, and also Kofax can be buying for developing countries.
The UK is opposing waving UK intellectual property rights is there any cha changing your minds?
The discussions are ongoing with the WTO and I'm not party to the detail. But the important thing is getting those vaccines made! Interestingly last year
That's the question he has asked you and I appreciate the other things are being done.
I'm not in the WTO conversations
But you are here for the Government tonight what is your view?
We knew this would be a challenge is the ability to produce the vaccine in the quantities that are needed because, you know India's population over a billion and so on, there's a need for the quantum, and interestingly, Bill Gates made a move last summer said I'm going to create vaccine production facilities, I don't know if there's a vaccine that we could use and there could be a vaccine. And India has been the heart of other vaccines for many countries for lots of years.
Big sighs from Danny.
Last week, 100 odd world leaders wrote to several governments to say the single biggest difference can be made by allowing the manufacturers, and many places are for the producing Covid vaccines because they don't have access to the rights. It's the single biggest thing to do to create a people's vaccine and make the biggest difference in terms of protecting all of us immediately?
I think the production continues to grow and this issue, and I think
OK.
We need to make sure that we have, and we are seeing and it's so tragic, in India, the breakdown of the health service by being overwhelmed by Covid is something we need to help them with so vaccines can deliver for their people.
If we are talking about sending vaccines abroad then why do people keep on mentioning in the UK vaccinating 12-year-olds now, when surely it would be more helpful to send vaccines over to the most vulnerable in other countries, and then they would benefit everybody?
We are not vaccinating 12-year-olds now, the tests are being done to see if that would be done in the future. Chris?
What I would like to know is if we develop the AstraZeneca vaccine, as basically, a people's vaccine, why are the Indian facilities us directions for making that to make up for the shortfall for vaccines?
They are, but it's a huge population in India, and they are struggling to get enough vaccine now.
In addition, do we need to talk about giving away intellect ual property rights. We could say come on guys you have made a fortune out of selling them, why don't you sell these vaccines to India at cost or use your profits to underwrite the cost of sending vaccines to India.
AstraZeneca, and I'm saying it because they are not here, they are selling the vaccines at cost.
Part of the agreement with Government funding.
Others are not doing that.
What we are seeing in India is desperate and heartbreaking and the stories of oxygen being purchased on the black market because hospitals are overwhelmed. We are seeing pictures of cremations taking place in streets and car parks. For a country like ours and with our deep ties with India, I live in Leicester, we are proud of our bonds with India. Yes we do need to do more! I'm pleased that the Government have done something, and concern calling for them, and we were calling for the Government to take action. We do need to do a lot more.
In the letter you wrote on Monday I think it was, you talked about when we have a surplus of vaccines, we should be giving vaccines to countries like India, at what point do you think we get to a surplus of vaccines are we at that point now?
I think we have to play our part in vaccines in drugs, but I think
What does that mean when it comes to vaccines? Should we be sending vaccines to India now?
Part of the issue in India is yes they need access to vaccines and investment in their Primary Care networks to get the vaccines distributed. What we also need.
Your position from the vaccines, and you wrote this in your letter on Monday, and a surplus of vaccines should be sent to India. Is your surplus different to the Government and then sending them. Our position is different. What is it?
What we desperately need is an international agreement about shared intellecture property rights on vaccination. What we need is investment in vaccination manufacturing capacity.
You think the property rights should be loosened?
We need an international agreement on that urgently. We need an international agreement on investing in the manufacturing capability in parts of the world so they can start doing their own vaccine manufacturing, and India can manufacturer but there's many parts of the world that can't. We need an international agreement around genomic sequences.
The crisis is now. Should we be sending vaccines now do you think?
Of course. But Fiona, it's not as simple as saying send the vaccines.
No I'm just asking the question.
What we are facing with India, they have got the same institute, they can produce 70 million vaccines a month, part of the issue with India is investment in the Primary Care network to distribute the vaccines. It's about investment in the health infrastructure to get oxygen out to people. What the crisis has told us as Daisy says, we are not safe till everywhere is safe. That's not a political slogan that's a scientific fact. While the virus continues to circulate across the world, it will mutate, and bounce-back and hit us and could set us back. We have examples of the Indian variant here in the UK and we have got it in Leicester, and parts of London. It's why we have to act now.
You had your hand up?
Yes, I mean, I think it's a little sad that we have to use an argument of self-interest in order to rationalise and justify sending things in India when they are in a dire state. I don't think that argument is particularly helpful.
I think there's you know, a huge moral imperative to help India. It's going through incredible pain, you know, sending 600 ventilators or pieces of hospital equipment is a drop in the ocean. The British Association of Physicians issued a statement saying we can do so much more. We have empty Nightingale hospitals, and we have huge ties as Jonathan said to India. I think it's a real shame that the argument keeps, we are trying to convince ourselves as a nation we have to do this to protect ourselves. We have to do this to protect thousands upon thousands of people dying every day in India.
Tim?
I agree with part of that. I thought Jon had some very good points but subtly dodged the tricky question of what is the point at which you judge the country now has a surplus. Is it for instance once we have vaccinated everyone over the age of 42? Or the case that anything we are doing after that counts ethically as a surplus? That's a very difficult question to answer.
I think globally, there's going to be some sort of redistribution of vaccines whether it's the vaccines themselves or the intellectual property rights. It might also be the case here in Britain we hit a point of which we judge that we have protected the most vulnerable in our society, people of a certain age or people with certain health conditions. Now, that is the point at which we should start to redistribute our own vaccines or put other vehicles first. That poses an interesting question to my generation because I am proud to say I'm far too young to have received a vaccine yet, far too young.
Boasting now Tim.
Am I willing to delay getting the vaccine just as the country is opening-up, am I willing to delay my own liberation from lockdown in order to help people overseas? I have to say personally I very much am. I'm not just being virtuous here, and I'm saying that because I think that those of us who are relatively young, and healthy have got to be willing to balance risk and to take risks to put the vulnerable first, but accept that we ourselves should live with a certain amount of danger because you could catch Covid. You could be done run down by a car.
For my generation who talk a good game on altruism, we could say Britain has a moral responsibility to protect its own who are vulnerable, but beyond that point the moral locus shifts to protecting people who are vulnerable overseas. I agree very strongly with the point that this shouldn't be a debate about what is best for Britain. It is simply what is the right thing to do. I think that would be the right thing to do.
OK.
I think Tim is right. One of the amazing things we have seen at Oxfam, and many of the other charities that are working internationally is the generosity of the British people who are coming into the appeal for India. The original question was what more could the Government be doing, our Government is cutting aid, yesterday we found out amongst the cuts will be an 80% reduction in funding for clean water and hygiene around the world. It beggars belief at the time of a global pandemic when there's more people in need of assistance since the Second World War, our second is cutting funding for clean water and hygiene, I can't understand that.
To Danny's point, it's really important, we are still the third largest overseas development aid donor in the G7. And the Chancellor has set out clearly once our finances are in a better place he wishes to take us back to 0. 7 that's a decision that's been taken
Are you happy the budget has been cut?
I think none of us are happy. We want to do it. But the reality.
Is it a decision you agree with?
The decision was taken and the Foreign Secretary has set-out his priorities, and how that
Do you agree?
Um... I think it's very, very difficult to see any cuts in those bilateral programmes, but choices have to be made, and you know
The sense that you didn't agree with it don't want to say?
Fallen on the Foreign Secretary to make the choices. He set out where his priorities, and one of them was Covid. With Kofax which we helped to set up last year we have the opportunity. The really important point on the vaccines is we don't have a surplus and we are working on a one-in, one out, and Tim's challenge is a really interesting one, and I would take that back, and say that should we be asking those who are, and the vulnerable who are young have been vaccinated so if you had healthcare issues, is for the healthy young is that a question we should be asking? The Prime Minister made a good choice, and all of us felt that was a very good decision, and we have you know, in fact demonstrated one of the most impressive vaccine roll-outs, and incredible effort.
Sure but the point you are making
The key point is it's a really interesting challenge is that the case that we want to er... say, and our young people say, we would rather as vaccines come off the factory line, they are not here yet, but when they do, that we should send them first through Kofax, and get G AR VI to deliver those. I think that's an interesting challenge.
That was the challenge we put to the Government in February this year! We asked you to think about that process of when and how we could have the parallel roll-out of the vaccine. Here we are almost in May, and that's one of the challenges, and haven't a started thinking about the challenge that's the problem! It's taken months and months
We don't have the vaccines to be able to do something
It's not yet, it's not just
One in one out
A debate about excellent at vaccines in this country, and it's also about what we are doing to invest in primary health care, and some of the poorest parts of the world. At the moment, of the 900 million vaccines that have been distributed worldwide, only 1% of them are in low income countries. Some of that is about access to the vaccine, and the health infrastructure, and you are cutting the aid role.
That's whatG AR VI's key role is.
And you cut the -- programme
We put money in to do that to help G AR VI. In the countries where the Primary Care systems are not very robust that's where G AR VI has the incredibly effective way of help them.
Cutting the aid budget
They need the vaccine. There wasn't the production capability that existed this time last year to be able to generate billions of doses and that's growing but we need to you know, keep at it!
We have got time to get one more question in which I know the person who has asked it thinks is very important. I want to say a number of people have expressed interest. Kristina let's hear from you.
Thank you. Can there be any justification for the continued incarceration of people in care homes?
Chris you have got a particular reason for asking this?
Yes. My late father's partner, a lady in her 80s is in a care home with Alzheimer's, and her daughter is allowed to visit her once a week for half an hour indoors, and no more. She's not allowed to go outside with her. She's not allowed to see her at any other time, and the care home says, oh well it's just too difficult to do, but I can't see why it should be so difficult to allow a daughter to come in, and this is you know, with testing, and with full PPE, and at no risk to the residents who are all being vaccinated. If this person was in prison, she would probably have more rights to have visitors than she does now.
OK Danny?
Look, I feel for you, and my uncle is in ICU at the moment and the only time we can see him is when the nurse takes a FaceTime Zoom call that we have with him. This is awful. But I think, I generally trust our carers, our health system to try to judge that you know, the clinical needs and the risks with the patient care, and the family interests. I know it's difficult, and I think we have to trust that they are making the decisions in the best interests of people in their care. Tim?
I think we have to listen to people who are in care, and ask them precisely what it is they want.
There's a balance to be struck between protecting people against the danger of the virus, but also between avoiding making people's lives so miserable trapping them indoors all day denying them contact with people that their life becomes not worth living. A terrible thing to say but that's how some people have expressed it.
My question is what are the rewards of being vaccinated right now? Once you have been vaccinated and you are in contact with other people that have been vaccinated there surely should be the maximum liberty between those people, and the people in care homes have been vaccinated and the people visiting them have been vaccinated and if we know the vaccination reduces transmission as well as your chances of dying, I don't see why there can't be of greater contact between people. We have to get this right and the very beginning of the crisis, and people in care homes were failed the most because the virus was allowed into the care homes. It feels in some cases as if the people in the care homes have been forgotten, and been left to languish there.
Daisy?
This is heartbreaking and just before Christmas there was lots of evidence coming out about how the lockdown on care homes, under the first wave, carers had been going in and out and waves of Covid but a number of people actually died some pretty traumatic, and distressing deaths because there wasn't enough support. What a lot of people don't realise is that family carers are carers, not just visitors, they do a huge amount of the care in the care home.
What should happen now?
Before Christmas I co-ordinated a group of 40 MPs on a cross-party basis to ask the Government to change two or three things. First of all what carers were asking for, why was it OK for paid carers to be going in but not for family carers to be going in and out, we asked for family members to be designated as the specific carer and to get access to the same level of testing that the paid carers were getting. I think what is really important in cases where you have mentioned people who have dementia for example, their decline has been so rapid without that family contact, but this is about the balance of harms. So, we do need to see measures in place to allow carers to see people otherwise they are going to die of neglect rather than dying of Covid. It is unbearable for those people and for their carers. We need to see that acceleration, and care homes themselves are asking for protection like the hospitals have, like the NHS has, if there's, so she have got the insurance.
We are going to run out of time. Anne-Marie, do you feel the Government has the balance right? For example, if someone comes back, a British citizen comes back from India say they have to self-isolate but if someone from a care home vaccinated twice goes out for a walk, they have to isolate for 14 days? Is the Government getting the balance right?
I think it's been an incredibly difficult year. I feel for all those who have had family, and many constituents of mine this has been a really difficult challenge, we had to.
Do you think you are getting the balance right now?
It's moving in the right direction. We have heard this week from John Van Tam that there's lots of evidence coming through...
And safe?
As we move forwards, we are nearly at May 17th the next step, and we start to be able to see you know, the greater unlocking of our ability to get out and about and meet people. You know,
Do you think it's right now, we hear what Chris has got to say, and many people have talked about the plight in care homes
We have to trust the health professionals. Different care homes are slightly more or less you know, willing to change the rules, rules are not the same in every care home. They run to their own frameworks.
The guidance is the same for every care home of course from the Government. Jon?
Well, I mean, the way in which this pandemic has impacted upon those in receipt of Adult Social Care is possibly one of the cruelest and most brutal savage consequences of the crisis. For somebody to be in Social Care, of course they need to be protected and not exposed to virus, and of course, staff have to have proper PPE, and of course, loved-ones have to be tested and so on. But to not allow a resident to see their loved-ones more than once a week, or whatever the particular procedure is in that care home I just think is scandalous, and it doesn't have to be like that now when we have got PPE in place, and infection control procedures in place when there's vaccination being rolled-out and testing.
We are not talking about allowing people with the virus to go in there and test and unvaccinated, and surely we can get a better system in case.
Would you come out in lock step with the Government, and May 17th is obviously the next easing of restrictions would you make it easier for residents of care homes now in
What we are saying at the moment is this particular care home we are talked about allowing just this one visit. It doesn't have to be like that. This isn't a clinical decision! This is a decision about the guidelines, and these guidelines clearly need to be looked at and reviewed.
Chris basically a last word from you?
I think my friend would rather be in prison. She believes that she has been put in prison! And I think it is terrible to think that in her late years, when she is probably not going to live for much longer she doesn't have the comfort of her family around her and just half an hour once a week with one person who has been tested and putting her at no risk whatsoever.
Thank you for telling us about her story this evening. We really appreciate it.