Our first question tonight is from Becky Pierce.
Sexism, harassment and violence against women continues to present a real and devastating threat to our safety and ultimately to our lives. When we will we learn that this is a problem for society and not a problem for women?
Becky, we are all absorbing the news about 32 year old Sara Everard who went missing last week. Are you asking this question from personal experience, Becky?
I am, but also I don't think I know a single woman in my life who hasn't been sexually harassed or experienced some kind of negative attention be it from men, which is really, really saddening. It is just so common. It has almost become accepted. I think that women face real restrictions in their lives and what they can do.
Even simply things like being able to go out and exercise. You have to think about the time of day, where you go, whether it is an isolated place. There's many ways in which women face these restrictions. We need to stop telling women to be more careful. What we need to start doing is tell men to stop attacking them and really, really change the story on it.
Bonny.
Becky, I think there are three levels that this works at. The short term, and I would say the short term as an emergency measure, women have to be in charge. We have to have a woman, three women, I would say, dedicated to this with the powers to bring people to justice. This has to be done immediately.
We have to have women in place at the highest levels in our media, in government --
We have a female Home Secretary, of course.
I want to talk about an attitude, too, okay? Where a woman is clear -- I'm not saying the Home Secretary isn't -- but I think we need not someone doing other things, we need a dedicated person to this issue. Especially someone in your generation, because your generation isn't going to take it any more. And so what we do need are these women in place in the long run. And what they begin to do is they educate, especially the younger generations, boys particularly, to understand and learn how to respect women. In doing that, they respect themselves. This is a five or ten year emergency situation, dedicated. Then I think we can begin to sort of see it level out.
Mims, when will we learn this is a society with society, not with women. In terms of government, what can the government do?
We have a new bill coming into The House which we're going to be debating. It is about safety on our streets. In that will actually be something I worked on when I was sports minister around safeguarding 16, 17 years old making sure they are safe.
Making women feel safe on the street is --
Going out walking, everyday things where you have to think twice about your route, who have you told, those kind of things. She is absolutely right. Today, International Women's day debate in the chamber it was really good that many of these challenges were taken on front and centre.
I would like to say to Sara's family and anybody who has lost someone tragically -- at the moment it is a disappearance, unexplained -- they are waiting for news. This is absolutely horrendous. We know it happened to too many families. I think Becky is right, we are fed up with it.
Realistically, what can people do?
Cressida Dick was right to say this is rare in terms of something happening and reassuring this is taken seriously as the statement, today, of course, from the Home Secretary Priti Patel. Our safeguarding minister to Bonnie's point is Victoria Atkins. She is determined to protect women. And there's a bill going through The House at the moment which is focused on domestic violence, making sure women are safe in their homes. My local council has more money. I'm pleased about this. It is an opportunity for a refuge, moving women forward.
Domestic violence is not isolated to just women. There are men that suffer domestic violence and abuse in the household. There are men that are very much discriminated against in our society and I think we have to be very careful about the narrative here.
In terms of domestic violence against men, it exists, you're absolutely right. Not in the same numbers as it does against women.
I agree with that. I also feel there is this nuance towards "all men are evil." Putting that in people's minds is very dangerous. We need to be mindful about our activities. I'm not saying it doesn't happen but you have to be responsible for your own self and making your own decisions. You wouldn't cross a road not looking both ways, are you going to get hit by a car. We have to take responsibility for our own selves.
Donna.
I completely agree with Bonnie in the respect that women do need to be in charge to make decisions to change things. However, I have to say today I'm completely dismayed to actually find out that, despite having a first and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland, both female, that we do not have any specific gender-based violence strategy in place in Northern Ireland. We're the only part of the United Kingdom that don't. I think in 2021 not to have that is dispicable. Last year, the PSNI, it was over a third of crimes that were reported to the PSNI were for domestic abuse).
To the police service of Northern Ireland. Let's hear from some others in the audience.
Question: I think it is all well and good saying that this is not a problem with all men, which is correct, but I think that the real issue and the real difficulty for women is we don't know which men. And I think that's why a lot of people are -- especially women -- are more cautious.
If a Red Book? Question: I think as a society we need to make sure we respect and protect women, even from a male's perspective. These are our mothers, our wives, our daughters. Ultimately we have to provide an environment where women can flourish better without the shade of men.
Bonnie, I'll come back to you. Steve, listening to this, there are different views, Becky is saying why shouldn't I be able to go running when I want to, then another saying you wouldn't cross a road without looking both ways.
I have been struck today from women I've talked to or commenting on social media how widespread this sense of fear is and how many women have experienced abuse or harassment on the streets.
Were you surprised by that?
The extent of it, I was surprised by it. I think every woman has the right to feel safe walking around the street of this country any time whatsoever. What happened today and the fear that women feel is not the fault of women, it is the fault of men who have allowed women to feel this way.
What can be done about that? I remember going on Reclaim the Night marches when I was at university. They have been going since the '70s. What can be done about it?
It is incumbent on men to reflect how we act. We have to call out attitudes abusive towards women when we see it. We have to become allies of women much more.
I'm aware when I'm walking on the streets at night, if a woman is ahead of me, you should cross the road so I don't alarm somebody by making her feel I'm catching up with her with some wrong intention. We have to be careful that we're not blocking roads women may turn down. All of this is something men need to reflect on. But there's more the government can do too. We heard the Met Police Commissioner say it is incredibly rare for a woman to be abducted from our street, but we heard my colleague Jess Phillips in parliament today saying it is not rare for women to be subject to male violence.
Two women die every week at the hands of a male.
There have been 6 women and two little girls killed in our country since that happened. We have to give women more confidence when abuse is starting to happen in the home to come forward and know they will get support. On average it is more than the 40th incident of abuse before a woman will come forward. If those women, bravely coming forward, telling what has happened to them, only see a 4 or 5 percent prosecution rate, that is telling women it is not worth coming forward. .
It is right that we mention, you can tell that to your pharmacist and they know you need help. You can declare if you come to a DWP job centre, we can help you. It is important, if you are reflecting on what we heard in Parliament today, those are very worrying statistics.
4,800 women came to seek support from a refuge were turned away because of cuts in funding to women's refuges. That's unacceptable.
Alex. Question: I just wanted to pick up on when he said men need to reflect on what they do to help women be safe in public.
There have been 6 women and two little girls killed in our country since that happened. We have to give women more confidence when abuse is starting to happen in the home to come forward and know they will get support. On average it is more than the 40th incident of abuse before a woman will come forward. If those women, bravely coming forward, telling what has happened to them, only see a 4 or 5 percent prosecution rate, that is telling women it is not worth coming forward. .
It is right that we mention, you can tell that to your pharmacist and they know you need help. You can declare if you come to a DWP job centre, we can help you. It is important, if you are reflecting on what we heard in Parliament today, those are very worrying statistics.
4,800 women came to seek support from a refuge were turned away because of cuts in funding to women's refuges. That's unacceptable.
Alex.
I just wanted to pick up on when he said men need to reflect on what they do to help women be safe in public. We need to reflect, we need to be asking our mums, sisters, partners, what is it that men can do and, specifically, what can I do to make women feel safer and be safer out in the streets.
Is the issue it's not men like you that are the problem. The men who wouldn't be asking those questions.
I hope it's not me is the problem.
I'm sure you're not.
Certainly women might feel intimidated by me if I have my headphones in, I walk up behind them and they don't know who I am, or I'm jogging past or on my bike. The fear is we live in a society now where most people you walk past are anonymous to you. You'll never see them again. We need to be more courteous to each other in public spaces so everybody feels safer.
Gary.
I agree with everything that has been said so far, particularly about the education of people, particularly young men. But also, a very important factor is everybody would feel a lot safer if we had a more visible police presence on our streets. If you go to any major European capital, you see more police on street corners, in squares that are visible. I think it is a reassuring thing to see police on our streets as a form of protection for us all. Unfortunately, I feel in the UK now our police force has become more reactionary. That they respond to telephone calls after an event rather than being visible and being there to protect us, you know, at the moment something happens.
Dan.
Well, I mean, to answer the original question, you know, when are we going to learn, whenever we learn it is going to be too late, isn't it? That's the thing I would take away. With the greatest respect to the lady who -- and I understand her point -- who was saying we all need to be responsible, it is not the responsibility of women to stop being murdered, it is the responsibility of men to stop murdering women. One other thing I would like to say and I think -- we can already see this with the nature of this conversation. I think we'll be talking about this for a long time moving forward, and that's right, but, you know, however we feel -- we all feel and the horror we feel and the pain we feel and the shock we feel at what's happening, I think we all have to remember as we move forward that it is nothing compared to what Sara Everard's family are feeling this morning. I don't want to be in any way crass about this, but we're talking about this in a clinical, policy-driven way about an appalling human event.
I don't want to introduce a discordant note into this, but I've got to say, Mims, that the comments yesterday from your candidate for the mayor of London and the way he is attempting to exploit this, is a disgrace.
Do you want to explain that? Question: Sean Bailey sent out Tweets about, in my view, trying to -- not my view, quite clearly -- trying to politicise this issue.
Saying he would try to make the streets safer.
He is trying to have a broader debate but he's not. He's trying to win votes. You need to tell him to stop.
I recognise that. Fiona asked what the government can do. We need to be reflective on that. But I do completely agree with Dan's point. This is very raw for a very -- one particular family. This is very raw and they don't really know what's happened to somebody who disappeared. I'm very mindful of that.
The role here, particularly when we have government, is to see what can be done about it.
Let me go to Victor.
I think Becky's question was a good question. We had a 27 percent increase in the number of women who have died as a result of domestic violence. That's at the peak of this, this is about women dying on a daily basis. When are we going to learn? There are things we could be doing, government could be doing. The first thing we could do is start educating young boys. We need to start early about how they treat women around them. How they show respect to themselves and women. That's the first thing we need to do.
I think what would be really good is if the government could spend serious money on a public education campaign about the availability of safe spaces but also to start educating men about how to operate, how to use their own spatial awareness to ensure that they are respectful of everyone but particularly of women. I think it is totally unacceptable for any woman to feel unsafe and to have to think twice before leaving their home to take exercise. While my heart goes out to the family of Sara Everard, we must ensure that deaths, and the horrific circumstances in which her family are currently existing, that we learn something, there's a lot of fear out there and we owe it to women with practical things we can do now. I've just suggested a few. Let's do this. Let's start now.
Sam.
Hello. Yes, I completely agree. That's exactly what I was going to say. We need to educate boys from quite a young age. You know, getting through to them that that kind of behaviour isn't acceptable.
Have you been on the receiving end of that kind of behaviour, Sam?
Yeah, I have. I've had -- starting from, you know, whistles when you are walking past. If I finished a shift at the pub -- obviously not at the moment -- and I'm walking home at 11 o'clock in the evening and you're walking past a man who has his hood up, you're pretending to be on the phone because you're scared about his crossing the road and doing something. My 20 year old daughter is renting privately but she's due to go back to campus now and she's a bit worried because where she's going to be living on campus is right near a wooded area that she has to walk through. You know, it shouldn't be an issue. She was on the phone to me a couple of weeks ago and she said, "I'm just a bit worried because to get in and out of the campus you have to go through a wooded area and I don't fancy walking through there at nighttime." I said, you shouldn't feel like that. But unfortunately that's the case. Even with a lot of campus security, it still plays on her mind.
It doesn't feel safe to her.
Yeah, it's just sad.
Bonny, it strikes me there are cases every now and again that grab the attention. I'm thinking -- I mean, I've been around a bit and I remember the case of Rachel Nickle, the woman murdered with her child in London. Yet again there was a lot of soul-searching about what can be done, how can women feel safe. Here we are having the same conversation again.
I want to say someone who didn't grow up and wasn't born here but I lived here half my life, this is a deeply masculine society at its roots. There are clubs not far from where I live that admit no women. That is a mindset. There are schools where there are no women. I once asked, I think it was Robin Cooke, the late Robin Cooke, I asked why were British men so afraid of women and he said they don't go to school with them. So the idea of educating men is very important -- and little boys. But I go back to the society I was born in. Hardly perfect, but what we had to do was put people in place so people could see.
/ 07 That's how behaviour changes too, by the way -- people have to see people in positions of power. It is not just -- and that's the education. Because we educate ourselves. And I'm saying as a small woman, to go back to the lady who spoke first, all of my life I've had to put my body in a position where I could be snatched off the street or anything happened to me. Violence against women is something that we prepared for. Either we're conscious of it or we're not conscious of it, but we are.
I'm going to take another question but before I do, I just wanted to say next week we are going to be in Cardiff -- week after next, sorry. So we will be looking for an audience from there or thereabouts. If you fancy joining us March 25, we'd love it if you came to be part of our audience. Do apply by going to the Question Time website. You can fill in the form there.
Prince William said today that the Royal Family is very much not a racist family. Do you agree?
Steve.
My overwhelming feeling listening to the interview with Oprah Winfrey and what's happened since is just a great sadness that this has happened to this family. I thought the statement the Palace put out a couple of days later struck exactly the right tone, when they said that there had been deeply concerning issues raised, that's for sure, but they wanted the space and privacy to deal with this as a family.
Your colleague said the allegations of racism should be investigated. Do you think they should be investigated, as the allegations of bullying against Megan are?
I think the institution of the monarchy is important for our country but they are people and they are a family and need the privacy to deal with it as a family. But I don't think we should glide over the serious issues that were raised.
In terms of the question, the Royal Family is very much not a racist family, do you agree?
I'm trying in a long way round --
It is quite long. Do you want to answer that question, Steve?
No, I don't. The Royal Family is a family comprised of people who are part of the society. There is racism in our society and it is deeply engrained.
Right, let's move on. Alex Williams.
Prince William said today that the Royal Family is very much not a racist family. Do you agree?
Steve.
My overwhelming feeling listening to the interview with Oprah Winfrey and what's happened since is just a great sadness that this has happened to this family. I thought the statement the Palace put out a couple of days later struck exactly the right tone, when they said that there had been deeply concerning issues raised, that's for sure, but they wanted the space and privacy to deal with this as a family.
Your colleague said the allegations of racism should be investigated. Do you think they should be investigated, as the allegations of bullying against Megan are?
I think the institution of the monarchy is important for our country but they are people and they are a family and need the privacy to deal with it as a family. But I don't think we should glide over the serious issues that were raised.
In terms of the question, the Royal Family is very much not a racist family, do you agree?
I'm trying in a long way round --
It is quite long. Do you want to answer that question, Steve?
No, I don't. The Royal Family is a family comprised of people who are part of the society. There is racism in our society and it is deeply engrained.
But there is also a lack of respect for people who are experiencing mental ill health. That is also deeply engrained. The issues raised in this instance are actually issues that we as a society all need to tackle. You just can't point at one family and say this is their problem. This is all of our problem. But for me, this came together in Parliament recently. So I brought forward 2 and a half years ago a piece of legislation that was passed unanimously. The purpose was to prevent the number of deaths of black men in mental health
I'm not saying it is not important, it is, but it's quite far from is the Royal Family not a racist family.
The point, Fiona, is the government has not triggered it to come into force two and a half years later. This is something that Mims could take back to the mental health minister, please, give a commencement date to this legislation because this is something we did do. custody subject to severe forms of restrains because of prejudiced assumption about them. If you look at the number of people who have died in mental health custody, they are disproportionally black men.
But there is also a lack of respect for people who are experiencing mental ill health. That is also deeply engrained. The issues raised in this instance are actually issues that we as a society all need to tackle. You just can't point at one family and say this is their problem. This is all of our problem. But for me, this came together in Parliament recently. So I brought forward 2 and a half years ago a piece of legislation that was passed unanimously. The purpose was to prevent the number of deaths of black men in mental health custody subject to severe forms of restrains because of prejudiced assumption about them. If you look at the number of people who have died in mental health custody, they are disproportionally black men.
I'm not saying it is not important, it is, but it's quite far from is the Royal Family not a racist family.
The point, Fiona, is the government has not triggered it to come into force two and a half years later. This is something that Mims could take back to the mental health minister, please, give a commencement date to this legislation because this is something we did do.
Victor, the Royal Family very much not a racist family, do you agree?
I would be gobsmacked if he responded to that in the positive. My experience of them is they're probably not, but the issue --
That's not a ringing endorsement, Victor.
I think the point is, as Steve said, we're all learning. The Royal Family are on the same journey. The difference between the Royal Family, though, is the Queen is the head of State. So what we need to do is look to the Royal Family and the Queen has made a start that there are issues that need to be thought about. What we really need to do is for the Queen to help the country actually have a conversation about its relationship with race. The NHS confederation established the observatory on race and health because we know that black people suffer worse services and worse outcomes in the NHS. I did a piece of work for the Metropolitan Police in 2012 that showed black people with mental health challenges have a much increased chance of dying as a result of the police handling their case. So, these are systemic issues, I'm afraid, and the Royal Family are part of the system. So they need to lead the learning.
In my experience, I would not accuse the Royal Family of racism but I would expect them to lead the conferencing.
Sue.
Thank you. What I would say is I've no idea whether the Royal Family are racist, to be honest, but the matter is that they have come across as racist. The interview with Megan and Harry, I didn't see much of it because the whole thing has been a very embarrassing fiasco. It is just that one member of their family seems to be racist. And I think we should know who.
Tony?
Thank you very much, Fiona. I have been very privileged to meet a number of the members of the Royal Family and I would say straight out, they're absolutely not racist. If anybody took the trouble to watch the programme on the Commonwealth, it was Commonwealth Day on Monday, 8 March, we have a very diverse Commonwealth and several members of the Royal Family appeared on that programme. There's absolutely no doubt in my mind that our Royal Family is not racist.
Dan.
Well, I don't think they're a racist family. I think they may well be quite a dysfunctional family, although that may not be abnormal in that sense.
It is extraordinary in that you feel Prince William feels he has to -- a journalist can shout to Prince William is the Royal Family racist. You can't imagine that question happening before the interview.
No, the reason why that is happening is because, in my view, Prince Harry and Megan have decided to take this psycho drama playing out within their family and hurled it on to the bonfire for reasons of their personal PR reasons, hurled it on to the bonfire of our raging impact law. Where are we this evening? The reality is we have a situation where we are told the Royal Family is facing the greatest crisis for 80 years, Britain's reputation has been trashed and we're told the country is fracturing down racial and generalisational lines. Some of that may be slightly overhyped. But the reality, given everything else going on, we all need this like we need a hole in the head. Harry and Megan's cheerleaders have been running around telling us all we have to pick a side, we have to pick a side. I think people will pick a side.
People are picking a side. But I don't think it is going to be on the side of those cheerleaders who have been ordering the British people they have to check their privilege and sign up to the idea that Megan Markle is the new Rosa Parks. You want to take a knee, take a knee. You want to tear down a statue of an old slaver, I haven't a problem like that. But you want to tear down an institution like the Royal Family, which whether we like it or not is respected, indeed, loved by millions and millions of people across this country, then you've got to do that, you've got to come to that, if you want to put them at the heart of the culture war, you have to do that with a lot more than a few old cuttings about --
Some of them from your own newspaper, of course.
As I say, I don't think that you can fight a culture war on these terms. Now, if people want to, by all means.
I'm not asking what you think is right. Is it because they didn't name names when it came to this allegation of racism? What do you mean?
Well, the point is they didn't name names, they didn't give a place, they didn't give a time.
This is specifically you're talking about the conversation about Archy and concern about what colour skin?
Didn't give any sort of context. And they have branded, as I said, this institution, which is important to millions of people in this country, as racist without any evidence. If people are going to do that, fine, but then don't be surprised if in a couple of years' time you turn round and a new Nigel Farage has turned up or a new Donald Trump has turned up and they are exploiting this for their own purposes.
Just to answer -- so much to say. Diane Abbot was on breakfast television in America this morning and she made a powerful intervention. People in America -- I don't watch French TV, but in my native land, you can talk about anybody, but people have no idea what's going on here. It has recalibrated their feeling about this country. I have been feeling like Erol Flynn for the last three nights on television defending this country's honour. That's how bad it is.
What Diane said today that was so powerful -- and we're not talking about it. Because I think the Royal Family and royalty is a deeply embedded subconscious thing in this culture because you always had kings and queens on these isles, always. You like royalty. The question is how does royalty work for you now? That has to be the question. What Diane Abbot said is she has met the Queen, she has met Prince Charles, as have I, and she said they're not racist. But the Royal Family is not just a bunch of people. They are the royal household. They are are the courtier. There's the network around them that keeps them going, props them up, tells them, you go here, you go there. Maybe that needs a clear-out. Maybe that needs a looking into. Because it is just not the Mountbattens Windsors, it's a wh lot of people. Maybe we need to look at that or that needs to be looked at a lot deeper. That's what I would suggest.
Elizabeth.
I think the question of the Royal Family being racist or not is a confusing one. I saw the interview. I didn't know when the supposed remarks were made. Were they made when the couple got married? Were they made when the baby was on their way? Were they, as Megan's father suggested, a crass way of wondering, as any family is curious, is this baby going to have its grandfather's big ears? Is this baby going to have red hair? Etcetera, etcetera. So I honestly can't answer the question is the Royal Family racist. But I can say the British tabloid press is bigoted and racist to its core. That to me is mainly what has driven that couple to leave this country. The way the tabloid press ripped into that woman and used every opportunity and used race as its main weapon. Why the tabloid press -- we have history here. They did exactly the same thing with Fergie and Diana. They seem to think if you have two women in the Royal Family married to two princes they must be at loggerheads and, if they're not, we'll create it.
So the answer, and my point that I would make, is I don't really know about whether the Royal Family are racist because, as I say, the evidence to me was confused. But I can say with some certainty, having seen the headlines, that the British tabloid press, the red tops, is. And that, I think, is the issue here.
Dan, you're up.
Funny, that. There's a couple of issues. Firstly, and this is the elephant rampaging around the last couple of days --
When you say the elephant in the room, it's not people have not been discussing it.
As you're aware, there's been a specific debate about racism in the press as a result of this. Let's be clear about this. There is racism in the British media. There are racists in the British media. There is subconscious racism in the British media and there is institutional racism in the British media.
Are you saying that yourself? The things you just said. You're not quoting someone, you're saying that yourself.
I'm saying we need to acknowledge that.
At your own paper?
I'll be honest with you, I can't say that I have experienced or seen any racism at my own paper.
In terms of the coverage?
No. No. I completely disagree with the idea the coverage has been racist but I'm not going to sit here and pretend racism doesn't exist in the British media. That would be ridiculous.
Just to be clear, so when you had -- you had the society of editors who had to resign after releasing a statement saying the British press is not racist. You had journalists of colour saying the depressingly reality of how blacks are portrayed on a daily basis is what was reflected by Megan's comments. Do you think that is not true? Do you think there isn't racism in the coverage?
I don't think there's been racism of the coverage of Megan personally, no. I'm making a broader point. There is institutional racism in all forms across society. The argument that the British media is somehow exempt from this would be ridiculous.
You'll know these examples as well as anybody, but the example often quoted of Kate Middleton, of course -- they don't call her Kate Middleton these days, Kate tenderly cradles her baby. Then with Megan, "why can't she take her hands off her bump".
That is not to me an example of racism. That is an example of what is part of our national obsession of playing minor royals off.
So you choose which Royal Family is the baddy and which is the goody.
The royal which the baddy and the royal that is the goody is constantly interchangeable. We saw this when people were playing off Diana against Sara Ferguson. The origin, the basis of that was not race.
So Megan was chosen to be the baddy and Kate was the goody.
No. If you want to go through the coverage, if we all want to go through the coverage, you will see that at various stages Kate has had a good press and Kate has had a bad press. You'll see various stages -- you'll remember, Bonnie, I think we might have talked about it at the beginning when Megan turned up and when the press and within British society as a whole were all patting ourselves on the back saying, isn't this wonderful.
When did you start to hate her? Not you personally, but --
I was going to come on to this point, the broader point about the media. Let's remember where we all came in on this or where, actually, they were going out on this. I'm old enough to remember when they were going off to Canada to get away from the press and to get away from the media.
I think what we've seen over the last week is, actually, they were trying to get away from press they didn't like and get away from media coverage they couldn't control. And I think that is the point --
So you're angry with them because --
No. It wasn't a question -- I don't think it is a question of we were angry with them; they were angry with us because we weren't providing the kind of media coverage that we were obliged to consider.
Hang on. Mims.
It is a conversation about a family in pain. I agree with Steve on that. I saw a lot of pain coming through the TV of lack of communication and -- you know, it is difficult with a young baby and a new one on the way for any family when you are far from home. I get that as well.
When you get the environment minister saying Harry is blowing up his family. What Megan wants, Megan gets, do you agree with that?
It was talked about the Queen being a unifying force. Absolutely she is. In the statements she made, she shows she is determined to use that for her family. That is a lot of -- we had a lot of division, some of it playing out in the conversations this evening. This is an opportunity to unify. I think we need to separate the wider racism conversation, call it out, absolutely, as I did as sports minister with behaviour on terraces in football in the way people continued to turn a blind eye and think that intolerance is okay. We cannot allow that. But, absolutely, we need this family to have that space and privacy --
You haven't answered the question.
Hang on, I'm sorry. I've got to bring --
I, too, have met Prince Charles during my time working with charities. He absolutely is focused on supporting people with the biggest barriers. Helping young black men, in particular through the Prince's Trust. His track record on this is second to none.
So I think we have to be very careful when we bandy this around. This is not a matter for the government, it is a matter for the family. But, wider society, it is a matter for everybody.
Victor. You wanted to come in for ages.
The reason I don't think the Royal Family are racist because I have met quite a few of them -- most of them, in fact -- in my life, I can say as a black men, and I think I'm more qualified than others to say that. But I think we need to separate the Royal Family from the institution as Bonnie pointed out. On the question of the press, it is clear it is racist just in the way they described Megan. They made the racist comments about her being from the "hood", gang type stuff. They didn't do that with any other princess. It is clear. Indeed, the resignation of the director of the society of editors because of the backlash of the defence of the tabloid press says it all.
We need to own up to this. I do hope the Queen, as a unifying figure, can give voice to the black community -- and the white community -- and actually talk about how we bring this society together. These issues have been around for a long time and it is time we started to have a conversation about how to resolve them.
I'm going to move on now. From PS.
Thank you. Do the panel believe that NHS staff deserve more than a 1 percent pay rise when they've had secure jobs and incomes throughout the pandemic, unlike many other people?
You're a surgeon, aren't you, in the National Health Service? You would be subject to this as well. Do you think that you and your colleagues deserve more than a 1 percent pay rise?
It is a difficult issue. We all love the NHS. We are all fond of it. We think they've done a great job and continue to do a great job and will have to do a great job after the pandemic with the recovery. So of course we deserve greater than a 1 percent pay rise but there's not a magic money tree, to coin a phrase, out there. We have a big black hole in the economy. We are going to have to pay and pay this. So I don't think getting more into debt is the answer which means you have to take the money from somewhere else. We have had secure jobs, secure income, financial stability, we got to get out of the house, we're not house-bound all the time because we have to go to work. Our children have got to go to a key worker school, haven't had to be home schooled as much. So we had some positives compared to other people. There are 660,000 people lost their jobs in UK homes. Something like 10 percent of all home workers. Half a million children in London that go hungry --
Would you be happy to settle for 1 percent?
Yes. I think the money -- I think we all have to share the pain. To me a 1 percent pay rise is acceptable pain, if that's the right word, considering the pain that others in society have to suffer. So, yes, I do think that we should accept that and accept that for the greater societal good and accept that other people apart from NHS staff are also suffering through the pandemic and also deserve something.
Mims, this must be music to your ears. The prime minister seems to be softening us up to see what the independent peer review body says.
Absolutely. As employment minister, at DWP where we had more people coming to be part of DWP from sectors that we never would have imagined would be applying for universal credit. One figure that sticks in my mind of our staff, 27,000 extra hours worked over the Easter Bank Holiday weekend to get people paid and supported because the handbrake on the economy of the pandemic coming down on them, a massive shock to the system. But of course it is NHS, our teachers, who have continued to be on the frontline.
Okay, but do you think -- this is a question about the NHS staff. Do they deserve more than a 1 percent pay rise?
In an ideal world we would like to be remunerating everybody on the frontline of the pandemic more. We spent over 400 billion supporting people. I know from my own trust, transferring holiday for two years, buying back holiday, helping with mental health, having more nurses on the ward is really important, 60,000 in training. That's really important. The help through the furlough scheme, the business support, the VAT cut, all of that has helped people to keep their homes, support their livelihoods. Where partners have been affected by the aviation or tourism impact. That has been very -- in my patch where Gatwick has decimated the local economy.
You're losing me slightly. I have to be honest. But in terms --(CROSS TALK)--
The subject is that a million nurses are still benefitting from the 12 percent pay rise, also junior doctors. And the average pay is now around 34,000.
The long and short of it is no.
We'd love to be giving more money but it is difficult. We wait for the pay review body. This is the start of it. The government made its recommendation, then it goes to this independent review.
Got you. Victor.
With all due respect I beg to differ with the questioner and I think many of my members would beg to differ as well. There was a lot of confusion and shock at the 1 percent pay rise suggestion. In the department's own planning guidance it talks about 2.5 percent increase. That was baked into the budget going forward. So people were surprised. I think the fact of the matter is the frontline during this pandemic has pulled this country through, is still pulling this country through a horrific ordeal. We need to understand that many of your NHS colleagues and many of my members are literally on their knees. They have worked so hard. It is not just they they have managed to drag us through the pandemic, they've also treated, in January, 1.3 million non-COVID patients. They have managed to maintain the health service for everyone else.
Are you persuaded by the fact that at least his fellow co-workers have had secure jobs and income through the pandemic?
One of the problems here is the sort of divide and rule. You know, they've had it so good therefore they should suffer. I actually think that's not really good enough. My members tell me, and the leaders of the NHS tell me, that 1 percent isn't good enough. I have to say there is a real risk here. When I look at the fact that more than 14 percent of NHS frontline staff that we desperately need to get us through the other side want to leave as soon as possible. 26 percent are thinking of leaving. So there's a real issue here how we respect the people who have saved lives and done extraordinary work. These are not ordinary jobs. When you are watching someone die and you are there because they can't speak to their relatives, that is a special place. And I think the public think they deserve more than 1 percent, and most of your colleagues do as well.
I know that Labour does not agree with the 1 percent. What do you think they should get as a pay rise?
There was a percentage the government had budgeted for.
Do you think that's enough?
I think that should be the minimum they should be getting.
I know Labour has been very critical. What percent do you think?
At least the 2.1 percent the government promised the NHS workers. We have to pay the review body to look at this, this is a normal part of the process.
What do you think they should get?
At least 2.1 percent. I want to agree with what Victor said because he absolutely hit the nail on the head here. Nurses and other NHS workers, because hospital porters, hospital cleaners, all the rest of them over this past year have sweat blood and tears to look after the rest of us. They've gone in there where COVID existed and put their lives on the line to look after the rest of us, keep us safe. They literally saved the prime minister's life. When the British people stood out on the doorsteps week after week applauding those workers, they meant it. But when Boris Johnson finished clapping he went inside Number 10 Downing Street and slammed the door in their faces and insulted them with a pay cut. It's not me saying a pay cut.
The government has broken their promises to NHS staff and is offering them a pay cut saying they can't afford it, but they can afford to dole out 2 billion pounds in contracts to their mates.
You're saying NHS should get at least 2.1 percent. Ideally, what do you think?
They gave Dominic Cummings a 40 percent pay rise.
That's not an answer. What do you think they should get?
They should not get what they promised. A 1 percent pay rise is a real terms pay cut. It is an insult and the government must think again.
I don't think we can bandy round that test and trace doesn't work. 80 percent of that has gone on test, on labs, it's gone on equipment --
A cross-party commitment said it had a marginal impact.
(CROSS TALK).
Schools would not be open without test and trace. This is not incompetence. We had a couple of hundred test we can do --
Germany got a statement working for 48 million.
The public account committee found no clear evidence that test and trace cut infection.
Despite us contacting 9 million people including the Labour leader who was not at the dispatch box because he had been tested and traced.
1 percent, is that enough?
I don't think it is. I think probably NHS staff do deserve better pay increase than that, but possibly not because of the reasons put forward. I find it quite patronising, actually, some of this argument, this idea that the NHS staff especially deserve a pay increase because over the last 12 months they have been doing incredible work saving lives. I'm not sure what people think NHS staff do when there isn't a pandemic. The reality is the decision on public sector pay should be based on two criteria. What sort of level and quality of public services do we want and what sort of level of public services can we afford?
Now, the problem is that at the moment it is very difficult to judge that. Firstly, because of the pandemic and the economic effects and, secondly, because, frankly, we have a chancellor who, at the moment, I think has fallen and hit his head. I cannot for the life of me understand why the government has decided to set out a strategy for eradicating the deficit accrued over the course of the pandemic whilst we're still in the midst of the pandemic. The government has announced --
I'll need to hurry you up.
The government has announced a policy of tax rises and cuts to public spending before we know at what state the economic recovery will be at. It is madness.
Bonnie.
A lot of what Dan is saying I agree with. I'm not a politician, I don't know all these figures. All I can say is I come from a country where there are 500,000 people dead because there is no health service. There is is no ethos of service. People are on the frontline, they are working hard, but there is not a central ethos. The NHS is a miracle. Trust me. And I think sometimes people don't understand. They may take it a little bit for granted. It doesn't exist anywhere else in the rest of the world. A lot of stuff that happened here that's good is because the NHS has been in business since 1948 and collecting cohort. They know how to line things up.
Your service, our service here, is the envy of the world. And I don't know how anybody puts their mouth together to say I'm going to give you a 1 percent pay rise. What? What? What is that? I don't even know what that is. It would have been better if he slipped it in the pay cheque and said nothing than to tell people they are getting 1 percent pay rise. These are frontline workers. These are people keeping people alive. These are our healers. How dare he. That's what I say.
We can come back to this and balance the books in the way Dan described with the £400 billion we had to pump into the economy to protect jobs and support lives. We can do that because of the other miracle, the vaccines.