Hello. Even if some children do get back to school before the end of the summer term, their experience is more likely to be about social distancing and hygiene rather than anything of any educational value. What can the panel suggest for a whole generation of school children who are now missing nearly half an academic year and face months of distrust about social distancing and social contact and the face of further disruption.
Andy, let's start with (done) you. There's obviously some schools are going to go back on 1st June. Some are not. What's happening where you are.
It is a mixed picture, Fiona. As you say, some are going back. Some have said they would rather take their time to get the right arrangements in place. I agree we want to get the kids back in school if we can as quickly as possible, but it's got to be done as safely as possible. The key thing is here schools haven't closed. It is not as if they have not been doing anything over recent weeks. Of course they have been looking after children of key workers. I think teachers are feeling a bit stressed from the teacher-bashing they have seen this week. I think we need to sort of de-escalate this row a little bit.
The problem is the The problem is the government dropped a date on people of 1st June, without any real consultation. I think the way to resolve this is to say to head teachers in consultation with councils "Try to get back by 1st June but as soon as you feel is safe as possible". That feels to me to be the right resolution from where we are today.
I have three school age children, a year 6 child, a year 2 child and a year 5 child. One of them can go back, the eldest, year 6. I have been asked by her school if I want her to go back and said yes. So we have half term and then one of my three children back and two at home. That means one of us needs to be at home with the children, so work can't go back to normal. If I had been asked if all of the children should go back, I would have said yes.
You don't have some of the fears we have heard from teachers and some of the unions. That's not an issue for you.
No. I have been impressed by schools how they are going to social distance the children. We have had a massive dossier for the eldest, washing hands, having temperature checks at the door and how they are going to be separated in class.
Equally I know there Equally, I know there is some lack of consensus over the evidence we have so far as to how infectious children are. It is plausible they are not as infectious as adults, but it is perhaps not proven. However, there have been a number of studies in Australia, studies in Finland, of a child who interacted after coming back from the French Alps and having Coronavirus with hundreds of other children and didn't pass it on. The chief scientist of the WHO has said schools should go back of the we have seen schools go back in parts of Europe. I did a story with the BMA in week that cited the spike in Northern France, but actually the foreign Minister pointed out there 1.4 million children had gone back. There had been 70 cases but most of them had been contracted outside of school.
But the BMA were initially supporting unions in saying that children shouldn't go back.
The Telegraph ran a piece with them yesterday where they softened that stance, and said schools should go back on 1 June, if it is safe to do so. From some of the evidence I have seen I feel happy with the eldest going back. If the other two were invited to go back I would say yes. I have sympathy with teachers, but we have to consider the infection rate before the lockdown came in would have been higher than it is now and, arguably, teachers could be more at risk going to the supermarket than into classrooms.
I think measures I think measures should be taken, but I am satisfied we have got to the point and I believe that SAGE that informed government that it was the right time to say a phased return to school from June 1st, I understand they are going to be releasing more of their evidence tomorrow. We need to see that evidence. So far it's not been transparent enough, which has led to this confusion
let's talk Let's talk about the experience in Denmark. Denmark was the first country in Europe to reopen its schools.
Yes.
So why was a decision taken then and how has it worked.
Well, I think it is very hard to compare the UK with Denmark. Denmark is a much smaller country. We have a different political system, which I hope I can talk a little bit more about, based on much more compromise, consultation. Of course we could never send children back to school without deep consultation with teachers' unions, head teachers and also parents of course, but they did succeed in sending people back.
One thing I was One thing I was really impressed with, and as Prime Minister I had my fair share of shall we call it debates with the teachers' union, but one things I was really impressed by was how innovative they suddenly all became. They invented new ways of going to school. They had outdoor schools. Copenhagen teamed up with cultural facilities all over town. So suddenly you saw kids having education in our national stadium. They start out singing the national anthem. After that they had their class in the VIP lounge. You saw five year olds having their classroom in the National Museum of Art.
Do you think we could be doing that kind of thing here.
Why not? We have empty museums, empty theatres, empty sports facilities. Why not use those facilities and give of a different kind of education? What I am seeing in Danish schools, yesterday I just saw a report, children were getting sailing education in the sea. So why not actually use this time to think differently about education and team up, but it can only be done by local authorities. It can't be dictated by the government. That's another reason why I think the government needs to have much more consultation with the four nations of this country, with local authorities, with cities to make sure this can happen in a smooth way and I would really advise to take the heat out of this because nothing good comes from this row that we have seen over the last week.
James, your mother works in a school.
She is an office manager in a primary school up in North Nottinghamshire. She has been doing a lot of these things, making preparations. They are nervous but trying to adapt and be inventive. She has been ordering in pedal bins for when kids sneeze. They have been measuring out how the desks might work in different classroom. I think it is important to say that every local authority and every local school in every local authority is completely different. There are big and small classes. There are areas of great resource and areas of great deprivation. I think it is incumbent on our politicians to empower headmasters and teachers because they know what's best for children in their schools. I don't necessarily see a need for a uniform, standardised national rollout. I think the dates, times and methods need to be decided by the teachers.
I really love what you I really love what you said, Helle, about the using of cultural institutions to contribute to the positive learning of children. I think, Chair, you mentioned it in your question. We have a whole generation here who are sat at home with these incredibly eager minds and desires to be learning. I think that's definitely one thing that the theatre industry in its lockdown has been reasonably good at. Education departments have been continuing to function and work with teachers to get actors sat at home and musicians sat at home to inspire kids in that way. You know, unfortunately we are not going You know, unfortunately we are not going to be able to open any time soon. I think it is incumbent upon us to find as inventive and as exciting a way to keep our kids stimulated as possible.
It has turned into a bit of a mess, this 1st June announcement. You had Andy saying "no consultation", and Helle was talking about trying to take the heat out of this. You have a situation now where on 1st June, at the moment anyway, it looks like there will be 1000, possibly 2000 schools that are not going to open. So this rollout that the government wanted is not going to be happening.
I think there was plenty of advance notice. The measure was announced a few weeks ago, in response to scientific advice. As Camilla said, there is a lot more advice and scientific evidence going to be published tomorrow for all of us to have a look at.
For Helle's point about On Helle's point about the constituent nations of the United Kingdom, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland chart their own course. As far as England is concerned, we are following the advice we have been given. It is really important when safe to get children back into school for exactly the reason that Claire mentioned in her question. I am worried there are children who are I am worried that there are children who are missing out on education, children particularly from disadvantaged backgrounds who are at risk of falling behind in their studies. So as soon as we safely can I think it is important to get children back into the classroom. Of course, at no point are we going to Of course, at no point are we going to take any risk with anyone's health, the children's, teachers', parents, anyone. That's why the advice is so important. It will get published tomorrow. There will be further confirmation coming I think next week. But if it is safe to go back on June 1, as we currently believe it is, I would encourage all schools to do that, in a safe way, to make sure children don't fall behind. We don't want any child to get left behind, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Let's all work together to make that
Do you think it would be more likely to be successful if head teachers had known about 1 June before it was announced to the nation at large when they heard it on television?
There are thousands of head teachers and tens of hundreds of thousands of teachers so it is hard to announce it to tens of thousands of people.
Hang on a bit. You have the department of education. That's exactly what they can do. You are saying the only way to tell schools was to do it through a press conference?
If you make an announcement to tens of thousands of head teachers you have made it publically. The Unions have been closely consulted about the science. They have been on calls where scientific advisers have briefed them on that. I would urge teaching unions and their members to positively and constructively engage with schools to find safe ways of going back.
Of as James said a moment As James said a moment ago, that will be different for different schools because their geography and classroom layouts are going to be different. The important thing is no children get left behind. I would like to add to what James said using these cultural empty institutions is definitely worth exploring. As you said, sadly, many of our great institutions likes theatres and museums are not being used. If we can get children into them that would be a great and enriching experience for them for sure.
We have Camilla who wants to send her children to school. You have a number of schools who are embracing, happily or not, but planning to go ahead with the 1st June opening. Lots of schools are not. What are parents supposed to make of that. Are some less risk averse. Have some made better preparation? How can parents make any decent assessment?
I think they are probably a bit confused by it all. It is a row that has been going on. I am not sure that helps parents. I would agree with Helle. Let head teachers sit in the driving seat and decide when it is safe to open school. Parents will probably look most to head teachers for advice about safety of their kids. I think it should also be done in consultation with local councils, because the fact is the circumstances will differ from one place to another in terms of the teaching staff. Some of them may be self-isolating. There may be issues they have to deal with when we look at the staff. There will be physical circumstances at the school.
Don't forget, of course, the R rate, the R number, the re production number varies from one region to another. Near in the north of England we see a higher R number than in the south. So you can't blame any council for taking a cautious approach. That's why I say to government work in partnership with local councils. Absolutely say to them "let's get schools open on 1st June if we can but we respect the fact if a little longer is needed to get the arrangements in place, then so be it and we will work with you in partnership on thatlet's get away from teacher bashing. We have seen too much of that over the last few weeks. They have been working really hard through this period often teaching kippedz at home and being innovateive in hall the ways we would want them to be. I think we need to sort of de he is collate this row and focus on practical steps so get kids back in school when it is safe to do so.
Let me read comments on social media. Lawrence says "if it is safe to go back to school, why isn't it safe for the house of Parliament or are our children test subjects".
No, not at all. From 2nd June, so that's a day later, these arrangements to vote remotely are being ended. We are going back in. It is important that the national Parliament does its job scrutiniseing what the government is doing, properly asking questions. Things like bill and ledge late I have submit ease haven't been sitting of the let's get Parliament working and showing leadership doing what we are asking everybody else to do, which is go to work if you safely can.
Can I just come in. I think it was a really poor decision taken by MPs this weekment we are not asking schools to come fully back. We are asking them to come back on an interim basis. For Parliament to vote to come become completely I think sets a poor example to the count reach. Let's remember Westminster was a hot bed for the spread of the virus a few weeks ago.
Sometimes in Parliament Sometimes in Parliament it is a case was do as we say, not as we do. I don't think it is acceptable. It doesn't suggest to me that the premiere work place in the country are taking a safety first approach. (over talking).
Briefly.
We will be funding as we normally too. There will be different arrangements for voting. It will not be business as usual but MPs will be doing their job.
What Claire was talking iabout her question of well being of children and the sense of it will be different when they go back, they will be social distancing, I don't know how the curriculumam lum might match up to what it might have been if we were not in this situation. The bottom line is children miss their friends and miss that social interaction. For children that have been all right at home and are in safe and loving homes, they have been okay and maybe they can last until September with not too much damage. What's happened here, know, is that the government expected 20% attendance levels at schools throughout lockdown. They Hope that all vulnerable children and a lot of children of key workers would attend. Actually what happened is less than 2% of children attended.
I am quite involved with the charity calmed the facial nal association for the children of alcoholics. Their calls are going ex upon Engineersly through the roof. I did a show with ester rant Zen the other day. She was saying child line had been inundated. We have to weigh up the risk here. Yes, there is a risk to children of perhaps contracting COVID-19 and spreading it to vulnerable adults and that's not something we want but what's the risk for vulnerable children for remaining in homes where they may be facing abuse or other problems which greatly affect their wel being, much, much more frankly than being socially distanced in a class room.
That's an important point to think about. What is the consequence for children who can't go to school. What we know and I knew that very well when I was CEO of Save the Children, if children don't go to school they basically forget everything they learned the full year.
We will have children -- I mean for practically lose a whole year of education. They have simply can't remember what they learned six months ago. So I am a little bit worried that if you last too long, we will be taking a little bit of the chirp's future twice. First we will take almost a year of their education an then we are also handing them a very, very large bill for a lockdown which has become very, very expensive. So there is these balances to find but I would just again say find a good balance with also the teachers and take the heat out of it. The only way this can be solved is by being pragmatic.
Claire, what do you think of what you have heard? What's your view.
Well, I quite like Helle's idea of using venues creative leave. I think what I fear is that the value of education will have been taken away from children and I think this is every child. It is children from reception right up to the 6 formers that have lost out on their 'A' levels and are actually grieveing because of that, but also I think what I fear is that there will be a distrust about social contract.
This term maybe but This term maybe, but going into the next academic year, and I think the value and the trust of the way that schools were before they broke up in the middle of March has disappeared and I feel profoundly sad and worried for those children. I am a syke ol gist. I don't work in education, but I can see the psychological damage that potentially is happening to a whole generation of children.
Well, Claire, thank you very much for your question. Thank you for joining us live. Let's go to Alfie now, who has another question for you have.
Hi. Test, track and trace sounds really, really important but what will be in place on 1st June will be missing many components including the contact tracing ap. So when can we expect to see the full implementation of test track and trace.
Full implemenation, according to the government anyway, is critical in terms of easing the lockdown and getting children back to school. So when are we going to see test, track and trace fully amounted, not just the kind of the beginnings of it, but fully implemented? We have seen the new app being tested in the Isle of Wight. We have learned from that experience. One of the things we have learned is we can effectively deploy test, track and trace with the manual tracers. We have recruited 24000 of those already. We will be up to the full complement of 25,000 by 1st June, so the service will be fully operational on 1st June, able to track and trace 10,00from 1st June onwards. The app we think will be ready to deploy a few weeks after that, but the two are complementary and the system will work comprehensively from 1st June, which is one of the government's critical test. You will help us learn more about the way this disease spreads. It will help us stop it spreading any further.
It is a really important step forward in the way we are dealing with this disease. It is good news.
Just to be clear, there have been a number of deadlines that have slipped. You are sounding very confident, possibly rightly so. I am in no position to judge, very confident on 1st June it is going to hit the ground running. South Korea is alway cited as the great example of contact tracing. They had a flare up in the night club at the beginning of the month. They traced 60,000 people to find 170 new infections. Each one was quarantined. Is that the kind of level of contact tracing the government is going to be able to do from 1st June?
The capacity will be 10,000 traces every day. The Prime Minister in the house of Commons on Wednesday was categoric. We need to be ready to go on 1st June. We need 25,000 people to do it. 24000 have been recruited already. We will get to 25,000 by 1st June. We are going to get there.
The app seems to be having a few teething problems. Having the app is not critical to contact tracing? It sounded as if it was the next big thing.
Experience in the Isle of Wight shows you can do effective contatracing without the app, the app is helpful, it adds something to it, and we will get that in a few weeks' time. There are all sorts of other innovations happening. Matt Hancock talked about a test being deployed today that gives you a result in 20 minutes. We have had advances in antibody testing today as well. So the science is really beginning to catch up with this disease. For me the science is really what gives me hope for the future, hope we can move beyond the strange circumstances of the last few weeks and return to something of a normal life, as the months go by.
Helle, when we look at the example of dep mark, it has obviously blaized a bit of a trial in terms of returning to normal life. You started the lockdown very early. I have think Denmark had no defendants at that point, poebly one, whereas the UK started after 350 deaths. Your lockdown lasted a month. You have now eased it.
Yes.
In terms of test, track and trace how important was that in terms of Denmark being able to cope with the pandemic.
It was very hard. It would be difficult to find someone who thofound it would be a good idea to wait a good week in the for the loved. The lockdown simply came too late in this country and I think that caused a lot of damage.
It was 335 in the UK and zero or one death, something like that.
They realised it was a big deal and locked down a week before the UK. There is no doubt the UK should have done the same. The other thing, looking at Germany, which is the Stellar example here, they started their testing and their tracing and their quarantine much earlier. So that means that even though they locked down more or less the same time as the UK, they were at a different place in their curve, and that basically meant that they have come out of this much better than the UK. I am not sitting here to criticise government. That's not why I am here, but I think we have to learn from these things and just be completely honest that, of course, UK locked down too late, and if this tracing had been up and running much before, I think the country could have opened much before. So the key -- and also in Denmark we had a much softer lockdown. So we locked down before, softer lockdown. Now we are starting the tracking and tracing and quarantining as well. The next thing we have to find out is how are we going to quarantine these people. How is that going to happen? Again a little idea from our own country. They are offering to use some of the hotels that have no guests to help people isolate. So they can he cost of the government can be Isle of Wight owe lated in hoe tells. There have been plans for this, plag Matt I can plans that can be rolled out and it has to be rammed up pretty fast. I have no doubt if it was ramped up earlier, UK would have been safer.
Do you agree with any of that. Lockdown too late and testing should have been started earlier.
It is hard to make these comparisons between countries. Demographics are different. Denmark is a relatively smaller country. We have the biggest city in Europe, London.
I got that. The UK has the highest number of excess deaths at its peak of any country in Europe, according to a study he from Oxford university. By any margin whether we are the worst, second or third worst, there are probably not many countries looking at UK saying "that's the way to do it", I would tentatively suggest.
I think it is difficult to make those comparisons when you have would concentrations like London, a city of almost 9 million people. All of those things are different in different countries. London is a unique city within Europe. Manchester as well of courses.
Helle's specific point about the lockdown was too lai. I am just wondering do you accept that, yes or no.
The government's advisers gave very clear scientific advice and the government followed that scientific advice. That was the right thing to do.
James.
Of course I agree it is vital it rolls out as effectively and as soon as possible, not only because of our safety but people need that sense of confidence so we can beginning re-opening our economy. Whether that's restaurants, pubs, bars and obviously hospitality, arts and entertainment. I think there will be a huge benefit to a test that can give an answer in 20 minutes for, say, film and television production. That's not the most important thing in the world I know but it's a vital sector and it's got lots of people through the lockdown. People are going to start to see the autumn schedules clearing themselves of British dramas. That will be incredible to have confidence that you can get actors and crews on a set. They need to fight, hug and kiss each other, unless you want terrible dramas. This stuff does matter. It is not the priority, but I think confidence that people can work safety, and that tour I wases and people who are returning to our city and town centres can eat and drink and re-invest in the economies is incredibly vital.
I should have probably pointed out to be fair the lockdown did come in time for the peak. So there is an argument to say if we had locked down earlier whether people would have psychologically been ready for it and obeyed it. If you see the lockdown coming in on March 23rd, it was about ten days later you see that spike.
The peak follows the lockdown. Lockdown doesn't coincide with the peak. The peak follows the lockdown.
There was an argument if you think about it, it was only the week before and rightly or wrongly, and decisions will now be made about future events, but only the week before there were thousands at Cheltenham. So every step of the way the government has had to look at the psychology of the public. Having said that, I spoke to a Tory MP this week who likened the confusion over time and perhaps everything seeming back to front to that Morecambe and Wise sketch with Andrew Previn, where he says "You are not playing all of the right notes". Eric Morecambe says "I am playing all the right notes, just not necessarily in the right order". From a public perspective, people have asked themselves "why are you doing this now". The quarantine thing, frips, people are saying, you are quarantineing flights now to fog.
Not yet but talking about.
Soon. Why didn't you quarantine at the beginning of this crisis? The messaging from the Prime Minister addressing the public about the loosening of the restrictions before releasing the paperwork describing how people should go back to work seemed to be the wrong way around. The test, track and trace it is great we have this technology, but that exercise, Signus, did identify very years ago the problems that would be faced by this country in the event of a global pandemic.
People will be askinging why has the fileing come so late. Why is it countries like South Korea were on top of this at the beginning of the pandemic hitting their nation whereas we only to be getting to GRIPS with some of that technological response at the end of it.
One of the reasons quarantine is going to come in now at the end of the pandemic rather than the beginning of it when by air passengers, There is no point in having a quarantine. They helped less than 0.5% of the case load. Now our domestic case load is going down and there is some prospect that air tribal will do up, it becomes relatively more important. To mess plures like quarantine become significant. On the general response rpbs there were so much things people said would go wrong that have been happened willed very well. About eight weeks ago people said we would run out of the ventilators of the inn fact we have 13,000 and never more than half have been in use. People said we would run out of intensive care beds. We have nearly doubled those and no more than half of those have ever been used by virus patients. All of those aspects of the response including the relationship to the timing have all worked in this country very well. I think we can all collectively take some pride in the way as a nation we have come together. It has been difficult for children and families and arts stect or and older people. It has been tough for all of us. We have worked together. We have been disciplined and thankfully now we are moving into a slightly happier phase ahead. I think we can take collective national pride in the way we have worked together on that.
And each.
Well, certainly I have tried to work with the government. I have tried to give them the benefit of the doubt. I understand how difficult the challenge is that they are dealing with. I have a lot of sympathy with that, but they seem to me to be repeating the same mistakes throughout this. The first is that sometimes the rhetoric is running ahead of the reality. We saw that on testing. We saw it on PPE. I think we are seeing it again with this. From what I know here in Greater Manchester. There will not I a world beating system in place by 1st June as the Prime Minister seemed to suggest yesterday. Fog fog Chris is saying it will be. What makes you say that, and each.
They just appointed the Chief Executive of Leeds about ten days, two weeks ago to try to integrate the local knowledge with this new national social distance testimony of the he is working through that at the movement. It is complicated. As I say, from what I know, it will be beginning by then, but it will nowhere near be in place. I just feel that 1st June date is kind of going back to that conversation we were just having about schools. Really schools should only be really reopening when this was fully in place. The second mistake, fee, if I can just touch on this as well, you know, theres lay lot of local expertise on these issues but throughout this the government has almost kind of disregarded that and kind of rushed to stand up its own national systems and sign contracts with five entries and then try to build something from scratch. I think we are seeing that here. There is some doubts about the quality of the training being provided. You know, they really should have used the local expertise first and built from there. I just feel the government is making problems for itself by not sort of learning from some of the earlier mistakes and then going down a different bath. I think we are getting there is the way I would describe it, but I think the government should be honest with people. That would be a better policy. It is going to be middle June before this system is up and running.
Alfie, this was your question. Are you confident that it will be the test, track and trace will be fully embedded by June 1st. What prompted your question in the first place.
I am a computer science student. My experience of software engineering is things do go wrong. They go often wrong and we are running out of time. If you want to launch an app on the same day that schools open, you are asking for the worst.
It sounds like we are probably not going to get the app on June 1st. I am just wondering if it is a question of interpretation. You have Alfie saying "when will test, track and trace be fully embedded". You are saying June 1st. You have Andy saying it will get going on June 1st but fully embedded, all bells and whistles, no. Which is it in your crew.
The 25,000 people who are needed to operate the system and deliver 10,000 track and traces per day will be in place by 1st June. £24,000 of those 25,000 have been recruited already and are in advance stages of training, so will be ready to deploy on 1st June. As you said, Fiona, the app will be a few weeks after that, which will further augment the system. We will also learn a lot more about Coronavirus by using it but we are going to be ready to go on 1st June. It will really help us understand how the disease spreads. It will help us control it, identify people who are this danger of catching it and get them quarantined and then tested really
I mean, it sort of brings us full circle back in the first question with schools actually, because you had a Member of SAGE, the body that advises the government, saying "a well functioning track and trace system needs to be embedded and working well before schools can reopen". Camilla, you are really keen for your kids to go back to school. The system is going to start on June 1st, track and trace. You will see. You are very confident, cais, it is going to be all social distance dems go from the get go. Do you have any concerns about that.
Well, from the perspective of all of the evidence pointing to children not being badly affected if they do catch it and not seemingly being as infectious as adults and considering all of the measures that schools have been put in place to make sure that children are safe and considering the fact that they are missing out on so much of their education by being at home, all of this is about assessing risk and weighing up the different probabilities and I think on a balance of probabilities overall after now two months at home with us trying to home educate them as well as we can while also working I think that on balance my children are better off in school. Yes, I do.
Let's take another question now from Gerald Amin.
Theatres were the first to close and will probably be the last to reopen, which is many, many months away, which could also be the closure of many small independent theatres. Do you think the government should help by bailing us out?
James, I am obviously going to start with you as the playwright here on the panel.
Sure. I think it is really worth acknowledging upfront against a background of huge strain on the NHS and the work of carers and these big questions we are asking about kids and when should they go back to school, they will of course always remain the primary focus and that's right but it is also right as country starts to get back on its feet certain industries and certain companies are going to have to -- they can contribute as profitable industries can contribute substantially to the re viet liezing and the reopening of Britain. It is incumbent upon us to sometimes have these difficult conversations with government where we need to tell them the specific challenges that we are going to have in order to play that active role in reactivating the economy.
You have the government here in the form of Chris, the one man government here. Do you want to more Bale outs? The government has provided all sorts of money in terms of Coronavirus interruption loans for business, that kind of thing. Is there a separate Bale out that would request from the government for theatres.
The job retention scheme was an absolute life safer for so many people in my industry the majority of whom are freelanceers. It wasn't perfect and didn't capture everybody. I think that's something we need to look at. It is unfortunate, because as joy flee over the next few months according to your plan pubs and restaurant and manufacturers Andy tailers start so slowly reopen, that unfortunately is not going to be the case with the perfect forming arts venues. We have tried our very best but it is now apparent there is no real viable social distancing model to get audiences safely and it has to be safe, back into theatres to watch place and muse comes. Up would have to be 20% full if you did the measures and they need to be 80% full in order to sustain themselves economic cleech. That's just a problem, because the cultural sectors are so profitable. It is not like this is the 1970s and we are Baleing out industries that are not profitable. I think the figure is about for everyone pound you invest in the arts you get about five pounds back. We can't wait to be back doing that for up of the it is not the eat give lent whereby arts funding costs hospital evidence abouts. We can pay for more hospital beds in our films, television dramas and theatres of the it is very likely, as Gerald was saying, that might not happen up to a year. This time next year might be the first time we get to confidently reopen.
I guess what we need possibly specifically is possibly more flexibility, if it is possible, on the job retention scheme for sectors that will have zero income for many, many months and then unfortunately, yes, we do have to start asking for an investment package that will allow us to bridge this gap in the short-term being not being able to open and then being able to open all guns blaizing, because what we have here and I think we are a bit scheme I shall. Gerald. You may disagree. I think sometimes we are a bit scweem I shall about the arts argument because we think it is an elitist thing when actually one in every two people go and see a play or musical every year. Think of all the success stories when it comes to British films and television dram as. Joy flee to be celebrated there is such a global thrirs for British content and stories and all its wonderful not earn mixed identity but it is all interconnected.
Just as a final point even for people who don't get to go to the theatre, that half of the country that doesn't gorks and that was me growing up, and all I think about every night when I go to bed is how are we going to get that second half to go to the theatre, what I think people do enjoy and has been a great benefit in lockdown is the television dramas that have entertained and provided mental well being to people in lockdown. I was privileged to be able to write and share Quiz, which was this major scandal about the coughing. I was delighted to hear from families and audiences watching helping to get it through. I come from theatre. Feeb owe water bridge who sold flee bag to the world comes from theatre. You will start to notice a difference if we can't be saved. The facts are without a bit of help 70% of these theatres will be cloersed by Christmas an won't be able to reopen fog fog we have the Globe says it won't survive without emergency funds, the Globe in London. Southall theatre management has gone into liquidation. Enough field theatre has gone into liquidation. Should there be a lifeline thrown to the arts.
Definitely. I think what's needed really in this timeline and it was almost the kind of if you yes of the announcements that were made last week in terms of the baling of the restrictionsbaling baling baling baling baling baling baling baling baling baling baling. Baling baling baling want to give theatre and creative arts industry a future you have to put a date on it so the public can say "brilliant. From September I can look forward to going back to the theatre".
How can you put a date on it. We can't predict how everything is going to go Camilla ka Camilla everything is conditional. What happened is we heard about things happening in June and hair dressers maybe going back into business, thank goodness, in July. We didn't hear anything about terror other cultural events. You know, gition and concerts. Now a appreciate they are at the end of the scale, because they are mass gatherings and that's what's completely advised against right now but if there were just a window, because I know from pie own experience around I am sure the panel I wases all agree, I wouldn't mind booking in some things to look forward to at comaches. That would give the industry a lifeline if they were able to open booking from a certain time. A preesh yailt the science is not straightforward. I feel they have been cast adrift somewhat. It is no wonder James and his come eetion in that sthee are in complete limbo not knowing when they can get baa being not just so normal but the new normal everybody is talking about fog fog we have James and Camilla suggesting a bail out. And eep, can the government afford it. Rishi Sunak is talking about a recession we have never known coming down the track and is spending an absolute fortune on supporting companies and if you recall owe schemes. Can we really afford to support theefters as well.
What would we lose, fee? These organisations are the fabric baling baling baling baling baling baling baling culture society I want to agree with Camilla, James and Gerald. This is tremendously important. James said sometimes people are squeamish about arts funding. We are not in Greater Manchester. We see the benefit of investing in culture and the arts, what this does to bringing people into the city. We paid our arguments organisations up in advance in tells of advance they were imoing to September go. We have upported artist was. We have set up a streaming plot Orme, united we stream which las been streaming Manchester tal September around the world and the money raised from it supporting venues. You don't need to convince us pa are pa are fee, I want to say also the sporting life of the count reach of the there is this drive to debt the premier league back. I am very worried about what's going to happen to lower league Football Clubs in they have to play behind closed doors. There is lay lot more private money in football. I believe we need to see a premier league setting up a football solid dart fund so the whole the football bier milled can be support the through this. We will see lower league Football Clubs going out of business one after the other. Culture and the arts yes, there is lay good case for the government to step in because in the end we have to protect as much of our economy so we can bounce back more quickly but it when this comes to football I think the premier league has to step forward and protect lower league clubs. It will be crucial to keeping up business. Fog fog you have made your appeal. I thinking in Denmark, given the lockdown was relatively short and not particularly strict, was bailing out theatres an issue.
It is an issue. There is a way the cult Al life place a role in lock. I think people appreciate culture more. There is common singing. There has been a lot of culture in the UK lockdown as well. I would agree I think the biggest things for theatres and all other institutions is know what's going to p ha. They will not be able to ramp up. They will probably have to run with 30% in the beginning and then they can ramp up slowly, sleelly into' 21, but they need to know. If theatres said in January' 21 we are going thof this show on, I think many people would book the ticket, because we want to get back. Diswraims James absolutely. The question for meerp as well is and I sort of resist the term a bail out because it is an investment for the amount of money that these venues in Manchester. Andy you are right. Manchester is an extraordinary city of music, comedy and theatre and television production of the money we need is to cover the shortfall until we can properly reopen is instantly paid back in the annual tax revenue and VAT. In London alone tourists bring in £2 billion of cash every year specifically for London theatre just to pay for itself of the.I agree with Camilla WPS just the question is what are we ending the lockdown for. Of course it is to get kids back Andy open our businesses but there is a huge part of British people is a social yabble animal. In terms of our psychological health and our spirit and more ale, all the care workers who I think we should immediately give a free ticket to go and see a play or musical to, I think that's such a important part of our may gos nal life and weebbleg completely contribute to that. In order to do that we need to be safe in the interim fog fog we have had a couple of tweessments. From Graham. "how ^ month by month. Will we see parity owe mine" there you go, Camilla -- or theatre resume this year -- I think that's what you were referring to at Christmas.
No, I am not. Fog baling baling baling baling theirs are loss are the sond hiem society, ^ heart breaking art isn't easy. Never more so than now." Chris, can you see the government extending a lifeline to theatre.
First of all I completely accept everything that James and Gerald are saying about the importance of the arts sector. Clearly it is a huge economic contributor as James very powerly set out but it is so much more than that. it enriches our cultural lives. It gives entertainment, meaning. It attracts tourists to this country fog fog so given that, can you see the government extending a helping hand.
Let me take the question in two part. In terms of what we have done already I would strongly encourage every arts organisation to use all of the existing schemes. James mentioned the for other scheme already. Every organisation in the position, for example, of theatre should be using that scheme to have their staff who can't work paid at 80% of their Sarl each. Government is funding that and has recently extended it. There are significant loan schemes available under the government backed loan schemes that have paid out now over £20 billion. Again I would encourage the arts to use that fog fog there is no question the government has made a massive outlay when it comes to support small business. There are a lot of people employed in the theatre who can't access the for owe scheme and lot of theatres are saying the loans don't apply to them which is why they are asking for the money. Is there anything additional the government can do.
Just yesterday the culture Secretary announced the creation of a task force specifically to look into the issues that James and Gerald are rising, clearly the art sector does have a unique set of circumstances and it will be the most difficult to restart for obvious reasons and this task force launched yesterday is designed to address exactly these issues. I hope again, as we get through the situation, as the science improves and we get things like antibody testing and if it is rolled out and there is some level of immunity, which we hope, but we cannot be certain, but we hope there will be, people who have those antibodies and immunity probably can go to the theatre and I think science again can really help us get through this but in the meantime that task force is here to help with exactly what with what James and Gerald are raising.
I want to squeeze in another question which is pre-recorded. This question is from Akash Lal.
Would you rather eat a sandwich madeby someone wearing a nice smile or by someone wearing a facemask?
Back to the facemask, that dominated the conversation and we have a situation where the government is advising people to wear face coverings if they are in an enclosed situation indoors where they cannot easily socially distance but otherwise, no, Camilla what is your view?
The jury is out on face masks. The government had to say face coverings because they did not want members of the public buying up surgical masks that could be used by frontline NHS and carers.
Would you rather have a sandwich served to you by someone wearing a mask?
I would rather have someone served it so much he was obeying hygiene rules in general. I would not mind either way, they could wear a face mask or choose not to, what is interesting is some of the evidence that went into Sage which came fromthe Royal Society and said one psychological benefit of wearing face masks in public, particularly on transport and in supermarkets as it reminded people of the need to distance and that is important. On the balance of probability, the jury is out, they could help or they might not, but if you think it helps to stop transmission to others and if you think it helps because it puts you off getting to close on public transport and elsewhere, it is probably no bad thing.
It is fascinating, in Germany it is compulsory to wear a mask on public transport and while shopping, in Spain they are compulsory in indoor spaces and outdoor ones if you cannot maintain distance. In Denmark, you have not gone along with it all.
It is not part of ourculture, as it isnt here either. In many ways it is something that makespeople a little bit scared to see this, but I dont know enough about the science and I dont have a strong opinion. What I will say is that I think we have to have a deep conversation and I hope the government will start that soon, a deep conversation about what is thenew normal? How are we going to live together the next year, for example,and I think we have to have new international standards of travelling, on planes, commuter trains in the morning, we have to have new standards and I would hope that the UK could also be a leader in this globally, because this is almost like after 9/11, where everything changed in terms of how we were travelling across the world and it is the same moment now and we need new standards for everything.It doesnt have to be the same in other countries, but I think we need to understand this new normal and that is why I am hoping, I heard you before getting a little bit defensive about what the government has done and not done and I hope that we can get into a situation where we all can recognise, this is a new situation.
mistakes have been made and I will take responsibility as Prime Minister that we did not prepare properly for a pandemic like this. We had SARS, Swine Flue and all these things but we did not prepare properly and I do not think the British Government did any thing and we have to be in a mode where we breathe and say and now is the new normal and we need to be part of doing that and talking about how we want to do that and get out of this automatic reaction where we say we did not do anything wrong and surely we cannot find a fault with anything, after all this, we also have to evaluate and create new standards together.
James. Coming back to the question, would you rather be served by someone... I didn't answer that question. You didn't, you're not keen on face masks. Would you rather be said by someone wearing a face mask?
I just cant wait to be served by someone. A sandwich or a pie would go down great right now stop I wear one occasionally. I think we will get used to it. I think it would become the new normal. I think it is individual choice and I dont know how you would legislate for it.
Andy? Where do you stand on the discussion about face coverings or facemasks?
I think we will have to work quite hard to build confidence in the public to go back into cities and support the cultural venues and bars and restaurants as we were discussing a moment ago. If it can help build that confidence, then why not. Sometimes people can see a facemask and think it is someone being distrustful of everyone, but as James said, it is the opposite, it is quite a public spirited thing to do because it is of easily reducing the risk of you giving the infection to other people.
I think we should explain more about it yes, it is a good thing and why people are going to have to expect to see more of it. I certainly feel in our city we need to build a clear reputation for being a safety first city to get the advice tors to come back, and I have been saying to the fashion industry. Weary nownd for using our fashion as well. Let's design. Mir face mask that sells around the world. Let's make something of this. Make something positive out of it. So I kind of feel we probably should look at what other countries are doing and encourage the use more. Certainly on public transport we are saying it is the right thing to do just so there's confidence amongst all of the travelling public and no disagreements between some people wearing masks and some people not. Fog fog have you worn one yet.
If they bring any benefit as I think they do, we should embrace and edge courage it fog fog have you worn one yet Andy.
No, I haven't. I will be honest. I have not been out very much. I have been Homebaseed like everybody else. I would be more than happy to set that example. It is about being public spirited I think, like James said. Face covering matter check chg fog fog originally the government was suggesting face coverings were not necessary and might give a false cents of confidence. Then they suggested when it came to enclosed spaces such as public transport, face coverings are faced. Seeing how many people are wearing face coverings on public transport at the moment, the reports seem to be pretty mixed, are you happy with the way that's going Chris he was in terms of the advice, it willy solve and change over time, particularly as scientific Chris gets update ched. I think people should wear face coverings on public transfoment. It is a good idea fog fog a lot of people are still not doing it
cs I would advise them to wear it as andy said a moment ago. There is a fair chance it will help. If they happen to have cierks it will Pope interpretationly stop it from transmitting. I think it gives people confidence to go on to public transport if they see other people are being care if you will. It also serves as a prompt or remind err we are not in life as normal at the moment E we need to behave differently, wash our hands more frequently, be careful, stay alert at the moment: face covering serves as a reminder. On the very specific question if I was having a sandwich or being served a sandwich, even better, then I think I would want that person to be following the guidance and wearing a face mask, by I think you can still smile and the person can see your smile fog fog you can't see it so easily Chris Chris if swrun is smieming at you properly, you can tell even if they are wearing a face mask fog fog at the moment it is a recommendation on the part of the government in enclosed spaces. Can you see it going further than that.
Again I think you have to be guided by the scientific advice. If there is compelling evidence it should be exuls reap in the future, I am sure the government would follow that advice, but it really must, as always, be led by the siep en. That applies here as much as it applies in all the other areas we have talked about this evening fog fog out of interest who here has worn a face mask or covering so far.
I have not worn one yes. But I have a friend in the village has made me and my husband one fog fog a matching wear of masks.
For when we go WAC on the tube. I would wear it I think on the tube.
I hope that would match the pyjamas you were supposed to be wearing this evening. She did a follow saying what should I wear on them.
It was pyjamas ^ment.
I think I must invest in silk ones ^.
Properly he is he was when up come back on the programme you will shall in pijamas.
Maybe when it is come I can relief.