The first question is from James alcock.
Why can you sit on a beverage on 8 March for a drink with a friend but you have to wait 35 days later to do it outside a licensed pub or restaurant? Social contact is no different. If anything, it's safer. Why are we waiting.
What's your feeling about this?
The social contact is no different. As much as I believe the British public want to do the right thing, the reality is, as an operator, I'll manage that for you, I'll make sure you're safe, that's what we do, we're experts in safety. If the guidelines are there to make sure people are 1.5, 2 metres apart, I'll do that for you. To make people manage that themselves, it is difficult.
Ultimately I want parity in the rules and fairness. I don't mind if we wait until August, what I want is support and I want to understand there's some fairness, some parity. As an industry, I have to wait for Richi in that case to come out, now I have to wait for the budget. That's not fair. Ultimately we want fairness, parity, we want a clear message. I think Boris Johnson missed the chance to open the industry early, do it with that support, that safety and that thing that we'll do, we'll manage that outside for him. He's missed a trick.
He's missed a trick, Grant.
Everyone wants to get out, to be done with this thing, of course. But we know if you're not careful about the way you unlock you end up right back where you started despite having this phenomenal rollout of the vaccine with 7.8 million people having their first vaccines by today. We still have to be very cautious with it in order we can make this the final time. I would love for us to be able to say, right, that's it, caution to the wind, off we go, job done, but the truth is --
It doesn't strike him as fair.
On the fairness point there's a big difference between something you can already do, which is go for exercise with one other person, now we're saying you can meet with them socially, again maintaining distance and what have you, but it's one other person, not a crowd, not a bunch of people.
We have had to consult the scientists, ask for the chief medical officer's best advice, ask the experts from SAGE and a group who modelled all of this. It is not like it was all invented from nowhere. They showed us at each stage, if we do these things, this is what we would expect to happen from the response from the virus. I think the British people have been through so much, it has been such a long year, we do not want to blow it now. On 12 April, at the earliest, hopefully it will be then, we can get the outdoor hospitality going, including pubs and venues.
Jeremy.
I think the question is appropriate. We have no clarity. The frustration in the hospitality industry is we don't know where we stand. Just as we were talking about sitting on a park bench outside a pub, why is it I can order a coffee and go to a beauty salon on the 12 April, yet I can't order one in a restaurant on the 17 May? We've proven, the government has admitted, that we're safer than almost any environment.
The amount of diligence and care that the hospitality business put in to applying for both its customers and its staff is without doubt. So I feel that we're treated like children. We feel that we have got no understanding of what it is going to take for us to be fully open. And the arbitrary nature of this five-week gap, we're told it's about data not dates, but there's five-week gaps where suddenly we go from stringent conditions on 17 May through to all gloves off on 21 June. I don't understand. The country doesn't understand. It's illogical. It is irrational.
SAGE called for the five-week gap. We had a professor of public health on last week saying it was difficult to be precise as to whether restaurants, hospitality are quite as safe in terms of rising infections. It was difficult to be categorical about that, despite the efforts everyone is making.
Tony, as head of the CBI do you agree with Jeremy and with James that it is going too slowly for the hospitality business, which has suffered so much already? .
There are sectors of the economy who are unhappy with the plan. I think the real regret is that you have to wait 10 days for the budget. The budget is part 2 of this plan. It is really important that if we're going to keep those sectors closed, for reasons I completely understand.
Do you think it is right to keep them closed so long as the government is suggesting?
I think the prime minister is the one person in the country who has to weigh up medical advice, school requirements, different sectors of the economy. I think it is only right if financial support comes along. By the way, James will know this, but only 40 percent of pubs have outdoor space. I spoke to a pub landlord in Cornwall today saying there's no way I could afford to open my pub so the outdoor is almost irrelevant.
It is wise we go slow enough to avoid the stop start. But if you are in the hospitality or aviation or live events sector, it's not good news, so the budget has to tackle that.
Let's hear from the audience. James, I'll come back to you in a minute. Colette.
I would like to clarify something. I have beauty salons, we have both been treated incredibly disproportionately. You can't get a drink in a beauty salon. Secondly, I think we share the same frustration in business. We are chomping at the bit to get back into business. The reason for that is because there's absolutely inadequate government support. We have been secluded from grants. Many councils are not putting through grants for businesses. The permanent care sector has been secluded from VAT cuts. We have the issue where we are secluded from government aid. All James is looking for, quite rightly, business needs to give employees answers. We need to budget and plan. We are running out of cash fast and we don't want to hear from the government again of what their financial matters are or how many loans we can get.
I think, apparently, we have the worst death rates per capita internationally yet our financial stimulus package, compared to other countries by GDPR is the third lowest. Quite frankly, it is time the government said what they would do at the beginning, which was we will do whatever it takes. If you are listening, whatever it takes, if you want business to open, you have to back business. We cannot save jobs unless you give us funding.
I have my point would be that it sends the wrong message out. I really, you know, feel sorry for James and other like him. Actually, as a layperson that isn't in the industry, the message the government is sending out is that somehow it is less safe because that's why you have to wait longer. The problem, therefore, will be even when you do open, people will perhaps not be as willing to go to restaurants as they used to. So you need to actually realise it is about confidence, and the confidence you instill in the public. Your answer to Grant was not very good, if you don't mind me saying, because you didn't deal with the question.
You muffled over it, talked about something completely different. None of us are saying we should throw caution to the wind, we just don't understand how one situation is unsafe, which seems to be just as safe as another situation, which actually might be more unsafe. So people won't follow rules or won't be inclined to follow rules if they don't make sense. You have to explain the science because it doesn't make sense to me as a doctor and as an academic from the University of Oxford. To me it doesn't make sense. You need to be able to explain it and you need to also instill confidence in the public that when you do open these sectors, that's the right time to open it and why you are delaying sectors in certain ways.
Anneliese, Labour are supporting the government as far as the timing of the unlocking is concerned, despite the real things we are hearing. You think it is right to delay?
We think it is important that the approach is driven by the data, that we make sure this is the last lockdown that we have, we don't see an imposition of restrictions afterwards.
Anybody who says this is going to be simple and easy, particularly for hospitality, has got that wrong. I did empathise a lot with what people have said, also for the beauty industry as well. This has been an incredibly difficult time. They worked hard to make their facilities owe owe.
You wouldn't let them open earlier.
Unless the data indicates that is safe. I want to underline a point. We saw the change in restrictions being announced about a week ago now, yet again we didn't hear what support was going to be available for those businesses that were affected. It is now, what, the fifth time that happens and a particular timeline given for them but no indication about what support is going to be available. Colette brought attention to the gaps that still exist, particularly self-employed people who have been left out. We need to recover from this crisis strongly. That means businesses like the ones we have been hearing from need to be supported so they can keep going, take extra people on, get the economy firing again, secure the recovery. That's what we need to see.
Jo.
I know what it is like to want to get back into the social settings that we've all had, but what I think is the message that is coming through from the business owners is, this is inconsistent, there's no end in sight and actually I --
There is an end in sight. June 21.
What James is saying, even if it went on longer, a package that made sense allowing people to sustain their business and employees is important. If you had to throw away perishable goods, that has been happening throughout the entire pandemic. What I want to see is -- and it is inconsistent. Schools are going back. I don't know what James' home life is. You could share a home life with a teacher going back into nonventilated setting but your business can't open. So clarity, funding, support for workers and businesses, that would make all of this easier to sustain. We haven't had those things and we don't have a sight of what that would look like.
James.
Look, I think Grant is fine saying what he said. He has not really answered my question. I have six seats on a kerb. I don't have a sprawling Mediterranean terrace. I'm sick of waiting one or two days for Richi Sunac to announce the right thing, now I have to wait a week. That anxiety is unfair. We shouldn't have to wait for a budget. The Panel have said things I agree with. I want the correct support between now and when I'm supposed to open. You know, why do my one-off grants have to last me longer than the retail sector, yet they have opened first both times? Okay, someone could chime in and say I've had a VAT cut. 15 percent VAT saving on zero turnover. It is zero savings. Extend it now in good faith. Where's my job retention bonus? I already spent it, and I spent it paying my team.
Jeremy, you wanted to come back in.
I think it is a point well made. I think it is the cost, not just financially but on people. I think we have to put hospitality in perspective. Direct hospitality accounts for over 3 million employees in this country, we're the third highest employer. It's a regional spread of 11 percent of all employees are in the hospitality business. What's really significant for a really blighted generation is that 50 percent are in the age of 18 to 24. That's where all the redundancies are coming. We already lost 650,000 people from the catering industry in 2020. There's going to be at least another 350,000. The number of people like a powder keg sitting on a furlough. We're running the universal credit scheme on behalf of the government.
Are you persuaded at all when you hear the scientists talk about the risk of indoor settings, the risk of infections ticking up as they did, slowly, but they did begin to tick up over the summer as indoor venues and hospitality began to open. Does that not give pause?
The government figures showed absolutely the opposite. We have seen .005 percent infection among customers. The government, the ONS have produced the figures themselves. The infection rate is very, very low in these situations. I don't understand, also, this idea that being outside suddenly you are safe. You are less vulnerable, perhaps, but you are not safe. I walked through Soho where people are sitting cheek by jowl shouting at each other in the noise. This is not safe. COVID does not respect the fact that you are outside. There's a much greater facet to it is how close you are to people. Also, the practicality of it. I do despair sometimes that nobody in the government has worked in the hospitality industry and that this is all committee decisions. My feeling about committees, I love the old saying that a camel is a horse designed by a committee. You sort of get there in the end, which is what we are doing, but it could have been a lot better.
I know this is about reciprocal nations and so on, and nobody likes reciprocal nation, but I think it is church I can't think, reciprocal things be of the past is that it can help us enforce that things are done better in the future. This is what we need now. The budget, as James says, is crucial to us.
Grant.
We are desperate to open everything up. You call it decision by committee but the reality is you have to weigh up the extent to which people have sacrificed, staying inside. We tried to open up, we got the new variant. This is not a straightforward, simple decision from one perspective. James, you said a couple of times I haven't answered your question. I want to give it another go. People sitting on a bench outside, two people drinking a coffee is, I'm afraid, very, very different -- and there's a pile of evidence, Jeremy as well, that when you are indoors that is how it spreads much, much more easy. All the scientists say this.
When I speak to the chief medical officer, it is the first thing they say, outdoor is much safer than indoor. Once you introduce alcohol into it as well, once you introduce more people into it, unfortunately -- these things all add up. Jo is right in a sense that a lot of the time you could say we could do A, B or C and what's the logic between them. The answer is you have to make a distinction somewhere. Our distinction is we think schools should go back first. That does use up a bit of the budget for the R, the reproduction rate. We could say we'll send hospitality back first, but we won't send schools back. That would be the wrong thing to do. wrong thing to do. Listening to this conversation, I know how frustrating it is, we want to open up, but we have been providing 280 billion pounds of support so far in the hospitality sector, the VAT cut, which I take James' point, if you are not earning, it is not the be all and end all.
But there is a scheme paying the majority of rates while this is going on, the majority of furlough while this is going on. So staff aren't being paid. And you talk about you want Rishi Sunak to come out and say now you have this roadmap, which is a specific set of data, and if the data comes to plan, dates as well. So you know the date you will be able to open on the outside, 12 April. But the support is already in place because the support has not ended when the prime minister announced the roadmap. You only have to wait until next Wednesday to get the full detail from the budget as well. There is no magic solution to this. That's what I'm trying to say. We are doing our best. Weighing up the different competing issues to do with people's health, not getting back into this as well, which won't be any good for James or Jeremy's restaurants, and doing it the best way we can. There is no perfect solution, I'm the first to say that.
There's a lot of shaking heads from our audience. Anneliese.
One question to Grant. Why can't your government announce earlier whether things like the business rates holiday will be continued or the furlough will be continued? It feels like you left this off until the budget to have that big political event. The problem is for these business people, they are trying to say to their employees whether they can keep them on, whether they are going to be in work in the next few months. They can't do that when they don't have the certainty.
All the support remains.
Not before next Wednesday, but it ends, for example, before some of it -- some of that support ends before businesses -- let me finish. If I may finish. Nothing ends before next Wednesday, but if you run a business, a pub or a restaurant, you can't be, you know, speedily changing decisions in a matter of days. The support does end, some of it, before indoor hospitality is allowed to open according to the roadmap. That is giving people like this an enormous headache.
I'm sure you have, as well, with respect, Grant, and I wish be your government would put its mindset into the position of some of these businesses rather than being driven by politics.
I think you're the one who is playing politics with this. The idea that we can't wait until next Wednesday to have a full budget which is part 2 of this and actually sets out all the detail behind this roadmap -- I mean, if you ever became chancellor, are you saying you're not going to have budgets in order to do these things? Of course it is the right way to don't it.
Tony.
I believe it is the prime minister and the government's decision to weigh up these factors. I think the support package from the chancellor has been generous to date. I think the thing the government is missing -- and you can understand why, they are managing a significant crisis, they don't understand business decision-making, the timescales of it. We miss the fact that hospitality missed its golden quarter in the last quarter of the year.
We missed the fact that automatic movement is missing, what we're all missing is the fact that if the chancellor comes forward with a few months of support, and I hope and believe he will, whether we get any demand into our businesses in the next 6 months, whether or not people are going to come back to pubs is the business reality. So let's not get too divided on this one. We have a roadmap, it is a reasonable roadmap, I think support has been generous. All I think I would ask, Grant, is the government tries a bit harder to get inside the business decision-making of firms because the truth is, before next Wednesday some firms will take a decision to pack up. I think we could have avoided that. We could have aligned the chancellor's announcement with the prime minister's. Let's stay connected on this, get inside the mind of the business person and the way they make decisions.
Grant, I know you want to come in. You've had a lot of time. I'm going to take a question from Colette Osborne.
Why not vaccine passports to allow businesses to ensure COVID safety when entering indoor venues?
So you run a hair dressing salon, don't you, Colette? Is that what you would like.
I represent 11 hair salons across the country. Our normal practice is we are very safe, we are very clean. It is part of our training. If the government -- you know, we do need something like this. We're being told to have COVID safe certificates in our window, we're spending tens of thousands on all the PPE equipment. So, yes, actually, I think it is absolutely the right thing so we can protect the interests of our employees and our clients and people know they are going to a COVID-safe environment. Indoor is safer than outdoor, some indoor venues are on a medical basis. You can have people sitting cheek-to-cheek on a park bench, yet are we saying hospitals are not safe because they are indoors. There's all kinds of things here. But, absolutely, I think it is the right way to go.
It would give the public certainty, it would give them the chance to go back into pubs and restaurants, back into salons, even schools. More importantly, it would satisfy one of the other issues we have, which is that insurers are not covering businesses right now. So absolutely 100 percent, I would love to see it.
You would very much like to see vaccine passports. Jeremy, is this something you would like to see, that people have something to say they had the vaccine before they come in?
Nobody has to go to a restaurant, nobody has to get on an aeroplane. In many ways it is a luxury, but I think it is something very important if we are going to break through on the safety rule. I feel that we need more than just the practicalities of life. In hospitality, it is about the conviviality of community. I think people will appreciate it.
I do know and understand the concerns about civil liberties when it comes to COVID vaccines, but one of the things I do like about it, it's very egalitarian, the great successes of the vaccine programme is it doesn't matter who you are, how much money you have, whatever, you have a right. And it is one of the purest examples. I would love to see the passports used. I don't want to force anybody to have a vaccine, though.
When it comes to who is having the vaccine, Jeremy, younger people are going to get it much later on so you have the UK Hospitality Association saying it's not workable because young people won't be vaccinated until the autumn so they won't have a certificate to come into a restaurant like yours.
Absolutely. That is always going to be the shortcomings of it. But this is only for a short period. It could be the way through. I'm not advocating as such, I'm not against it.
Anneliese, what is Labour's position?
This is not a simple issue. That has been summed up in what Jeremy said. I think there are risks in all different directions around this. Obviously, there are major practicalities. There are those ethical issues as well and equality issues. I have to say, personally, to me the most important thing, that is obscured a bit about this debate, is about the speed of vaccination.
That isn't the question. The question is should there be a vaccine passport to allow businesses to ensure COVID safety when entering indoor venues? Do you have a position on that?
If we don't see people being vaccinated at speed, then it will be very unfair because the young people we just mentioned wouldn't be able to have that. We have said, for example, we would have wanted the vaccination to go much more quickly so we could have had vaccinated over the half term. We did state that. We believe there could have been capacity to deliver that. There are examples of different facilities that said they could have been involved in that vaccination effort.
What's your answer to the question?
I think we have to be driven by the evidence. I don't think a politician saying black and white, yes, no, on this without having that evidence is credible, to be honest with you. We need to look at this carefully. I'm sure Grant will talk about this, the government have announced a review around this subject. I think that's right. If there is, for example, a system in the future that's introduced, it needs to command public support if it is going to come in. It needs to be credible.
But just to be clear, at the moment you don't have a position whether the vaccine passport to be able to get into businesses, restaurants, for example, you don't have a position whether it is a good or bad idea.
We need to have the evidence around this. We need to understand more.
Jo.
I have two reservations. As a customer, you might think it is fine. I have two reservations. One is about workers, the extent to whether workers will be compelled, coerced, to have a vaccine when they don't want to. But my primary concern, and I worry this has happened a lot during the pandemic, is we're always looking for a quick solution, for a shortcut, for the next fix, when what we need to do is get on top of the virus, as close to a zero state as possible. So I have lots of empathy with business owners who would like this to enable their customers to feel safe, but there's a sting in the tail for workers here, particularly in terms of hospitality and getting people back in.
Bethany. What would you like to say?
I work in healthcare and I encourage every patient I meet to get their COVID vaccine, but the idea of a passport is ethically unacceptable. You you cannot have two tiers of society, one group who can go out and enjoy themselves, the others who have to stay inside. I think the moral dilemma that creates is awful.
If it was their choice not because they were ineligible for a vaccine but because they chose not to have it, you would find that ethically unacceptable?
Yes. You can't coerce people to have treatments they don't want. Whether it is for public good or not, it is coercion. It's unfair.
Becky?
So just to completely agree with that. I think it would be immoral to force people to be vaccinated when they don't want to be. I also work in healthcare. I've had my vaccine and I would strongly encourage every single person who gets the letter to go have the vaccine, but there's something about understanding the reasons why people aren't having the vaccine and encouraging, supporting and educating as opposed to penalising people. I agree it would deepen inequality where you have a two-tier system. Also, on a practical basis, the viability of it. You know, how would it work? I just -- I see that it might be open to abuse and exploitation. I just don't think the investment of a system like that is worth what we would get off the back of it. I think it would lead to inequality.
Steve.
It already exists in a way. I'm lucky to have had my first vaccination. When you get the vaccination you get a little card with the details of the date and time of the vaccination. Now, assuming that my situation is not unique, then it probably means that the majority of people have already had such a document. Now, business owners can decide at their own whim whether or not to serve people. If they choose to take action if you can't show proof you had a vaccination, they are entitled to do that. So the point is, really, a vaccines passport almost existed all right.
Tony, what's the view of the CBI on this?
I asked about 200 businesses about this this week. This is what I have learned. It could just be for vaccination, it should also include testing. I think that will take care of some of the timing thing. I agree with Jeremy, I don't think it is quite the coercion issue, because we are talking about voluntary activities. It shouldn't be true for compulsory activities.
The third thing I think everyone is saying is this can't be the new normal. We can't build a society where everybody carries around health cards. This is different from what happened after 9/11. This would be useful and welcomed if it would help in the short run. The only thing I would say, and I think this is for Michael Gove in his review, you have to talk to people on the frontline to make it happen. We saw with supermarkets when it came to masks, mask wearing, that was incredibly difficult to operate. So I do think if we're going to -- I realise there are ethical issues, but before you get to that, let's make sure this is implementable. Let's get talking to people on this call working in restaurants and hair salons, about how to do it, make sure we could do it, then if it helps in the short run, it is definitely work worth a look.
We had a vaccines minister saying it is out the question, but it is not out the question because the government is doing this.
It's --
Two or three weeks ago. Something like that. In a demon is a Hary was saying absolutely not.
Let's talk about the future. We have over a third of the population vaccinated now. It is a real question. All the points raised have been very good. When you open it up it is a can of worms. It is moral, ethical issues, practicalities, which is why we set up the task force to look at it. We expect if government is not involved, not having the discussion, businesses would try to go off and do their own things. What happens to somebody who, for medical reasons, can't have it, to younger people who won't get this for a while, to children -- the vaccine has not even been trialed on children yet, so are we saying they can't access those services? It is true to say this needs to be about testing as well as vaccines. Then, of course, how does it work for international travel? I'm running a separate task force on international global travel task force to work out what we do there. When we travel internationally to certain countries you have to show a yellow fever card. So there are precedents for this. It is a minefield.
I think all the points have been very well made. What we are going to do is have a look at this and come forward with some recommendations about how it can practically work. What we can say, the more people we can get vaccinated, the better. The one thing we'd all agree on this evening is the speed of the vaccination programme has been tremendous. There's no country in Europe who are anywhere close to the speed -- one of the amazing -- one of the things we're going to have to think about, talking about international travel, is what happens if we are largely vaccinated by the summer, for example, but the places people want to go to are not vaccinated. Another can of worms. So, there are all sorts of questions which is why we set up two task forces, one that Michael Gove will run on the domestic side, and one International, which I will run.
Another question from Vanessa.
Good evening. Matt Hancock claimed there never was a national PPE shortage during the pandemic. I find this quite disrespectful to all the healthcare workers that have been fighting for their safety during the pandemic. So can the government explain why they think there were no shortages?
I'll let you catch your breath, Grant. Anneliese?
I think it has been very difficult to explain why there were no shortages because we know there were shortages. I know that myself from having talked to health professionals, people who were deeply frustrated, who were actually in some cases quite frightened, to be honest with you, about the working situation. They were at that frontline. I think it is deeply disappointing that we don't have the openness about what went wrong. Somebody mentioned earlier -- I can't remember who it was -- it was Jeremy, who said we need to learn from what happened during this crisis. We need to understand, you know, when there were those problems with supply, how we can make sure that we don't end up in that position again. I think that's critically important. Let's be honest about this. Let's learn from those at the frontline so we can ensure they have what they need into the future.
This is the first time you reached for your notes. I wonder if this is a tricky question.
No, I wanted to quote from something I read. NHS providers said we were always able to get what we needed in time.
The National Audit Office said that was not the report from frontline staff.
Let me follow up on that. If you think about the way the virus got going and the entire world was looking to get PPE.
We all know it was difficult, there was a global shortage. You don't need to tell us that. Matt Hancock claimed there was never a national PPE shortage during the pandemic. Do you think he was right?
I think what he was saying was quoting from NHS providers.
Was he right? That's the question.
Yes. Because the NHS providers said they were always able to get it.
You have doctors wearing bin liners and ski goggles, you have the Royal Head of Nursing saying this is deeply insulting, nurses were put in harm's way because they couldn't access proper protection. You have doctors' association applying because they didn't have enough. Are you saying he is right, that there wasn't a national shortage of PPE?
Let me answer the question and get the whole thing out. First of all, the entire world was scrambling to get PPE.
We know that.
Let me finish the point. We didn't have a domestic manufacturing base for this country in PPE. Now we are producing 70 per cent of the PPE right here. We delivered 32 billion pieces of PPE. Were we having to work very hard.
No, the question is was Matt Hancock right that there never was a national PPE shortage? That's the question.
With the exception of isolated cases, we managed to get the PPE there. I'm trying to answer this as honestly as possible for you. It wasn't a satisfactory situation that we didn't have domestic production, everybody was trying to get the same PPE. We were prepared for a flu pandemic, different types of PPE. Only a fool would say you wouldn't look back on this and say there are things we wished we had, pieces of equipment we had, and if it was starting again from today we would have it, not least because we're manufacturing here.
Just to be clear, you think he was right to say that there wasn't a national PPE shortage?
I think he was quoting from the NHS providers, or from the chair of the Public Accounts Committee who said that this was a benchmark for procurement exercise in getting PPE. 32 billion pieces of PPE.
Okay. You are saying he is right?
Remember this. The government has never, ever been responsible for providing PPE to the care sector. The government actually managed to complete the purchase so that the care sector was receiving it as well in addition to all the hospitals.
Jo.
I don't understand why we are making excuses for Matt Hancock's willful amnesia or willful misremembering of what happened last year. There was insufficient PPE in hospitals. There was frequently the adoption of a two-tier system who got it, there were surgeons, care workers, nurses, reusing PPE. There were examples of hospitals using PPE ten years out of date. Some of the lowest paid, insecurely paid people, literally the ones holding iPads while we had to watch our loved ones on Zoom not having access to PPE. The idea we are all taken by surprise, couldn't accommodate this, when that is years and decades of underfunding of our NHS is an insult to anybody who provides care who works in that sector or associated industries. It would be so much nicer if we could just apologise to those people, acknowledge what happened, and not give contracts to our mates who don't have any experience in providing PPE. That would be a great start.
Okay. Obviously the government denies that is in fact what happened in terms of contracts.
There's a few medics in our audience. I want to hear from you.
I'm sympathetic to Grant's reasoning as to why it was difficult to get enough PPE. But, again, that doesn't answer the question. The question was, was there a shortage? There was a shortage. Your entire answer was explaining why it was difficult to get it and why there was a shortage. But you have to acknowledge there was a shortage. Yes, it was difficult to get it but I know colleagues, personally, who were in unprotected situations that got COVID. I have family friends, colleagues, who are medics who died from COVID having not had PPE. For you to sit there and say there was no shortage is grossly insulting. I would much rather you said: This is really hard. It's really hard for us to have got the PPE yes, therefore we weren't able to get it all and there was a shortage. We can then understand that rather than you denying the fact that there was a shortage.
Bethany?
I think that we should be ashamed to have Matt Hancock as a health secretary. I think he has been repeatedly disrespectful to everyone in the health and care sector. Colleagues have died, been unwell, because of shortages. Whether people tried to access PPE or not is not the point but the fact there was a shortage and he has ignored that and been disrespectful to a whole sector that he is in charge of is disgraceful.
Becky, you work in the NHS as well.
Yes. I think this just speaks to a broader point as not being able to acknowledge when mistakes have been made. I think that Matt Hancock could really learn from the health and care sector. We have systems of learning and safety cultures embedded that we're constantly trying to improve. We're trying to acknowledge when mistakes have been made and learn from them. We are all fallible, we are human beings. We will make mistakes. It was difficult for every single country. By not acknowledging that -- I understand it is politically difficult to say I made a mistake, but we're going to have to start doing that because that's the only way we will get better as a country.
Jeremy.
It is really interesting that we've had a proliferation around the world of what I call narcisstic denial, that if we shout loud enough that something didn't happen people will imagine it didn't. I feel the old saying that success has many parents and failure is an orphan is very prevalent at the moment. Before we move away from vaccinations one of the great successes, who everybody is taking the credit for is Kate Bingham. She didn't have any vaccines available, just like there was no PPE, but with amazing, amazing resilience she managed to make one of the great successes of this awful pandemic is the rollout of the vaccination programme and doesn't get the credit for it. I long for a time when people will admit their mistakes. We are all human. I'm just very disappointed that there was a denial.
Tony.
I'm going to be a very boring business person on this one. I think this might be a bit more boring --
Please don't be boring.
Now I've created the right expectations. I think what there wasn't was an oversupply of PPE which is what you need if everybody is going to be able to access it.
You don't think there was a shortage?
I think there was a shortage by definition because there wasn't enough in the place it needed to be all the time. This is like stocking supermarkets across the country. We're going to need 1 million loaves of bread and we'll spread this to them. You need 2 million if there's going to be a million bought. I'm sorry, it's a much more boring answer, but what's going on here is people are sitting centrally saying we have enough stock for what the country needs but that doesn't mean every hospital has enough supply. To Jeremy's point about the vaccine, what we have now is an oversupply of vaccine. We have people at the end of the day who are trying to get rid of vaccines with volunteers. What we didn't have with PPE, it seems to me, is the necessary oversupply of PPE. So it is disingenuous to say mathematically we have enough. If you haven't enough in every part of the country, you haven't got enough. I think this might be a maths story rather than anything too much more sinister than that.
Grant, I must let you reply. Narcissistic denial, which is is new one on Question Time. Disingenuous, insulting, just not true.
I think that was to math.
You are here for the government, I'm afraid. You've copped it.
We're starting from a position where we delivered 32 billion pieces of PPE. We're at the other end of the crisis. A year ago, if we had been sitting here, just beginning to hear about the coronavirus thing, for years this country had not invested in doing testing so we couldn't test for this, we hadn't invested in making PPE, so 1 percent of our PPE was being made in this country. I don't want to sit here and say, oh it was all easy. We didn't, day in, day out, we were battling to make sure there was enough PPE in the hospitals and in the care homes, who we never had to supply before. And we were in that position worldwide, globally, with every other country. Now, the audience and people listening are right to say why didn't Britain work this out before the --
They were saying there was a shortage.
I vaguely picked up on the health sector comments. I think he was quoting NHS providers rather than himself saying that. Probably the point is about getting it to the right place. Help that was given to us by the army to get it there. It was a national effort to get there. At the other end of this crisis we can see that now we don't complain. My father has just been in hospital. We had that conversation on the iPad. None of the doctors are saying now --
I'm not entirely sure that answers the question.
None of the doctors are saying now they don't have the PPE. When I spoke to the doctors, they are saying they have the best PPE.
I have given you my best shot to get you to answer, I'm not sure I succeeded.
Let's take a question from Stephanie pits.
Why do the government think that summer schools are a good way for students to catch up? Especially disadvantaged students.
Stephanie, you are a business manager at a secondary school. This is a new announcement about summer schools. Do you think it would be a good idea?
I think the problem with it is that certainly for disadvantaged students, they are not going to take up the opportunity. The EEF did a pilot. I think about 50 percent didn't take up the opportunity. I think there are other ways. I think school leaders know their cohorts, their communities, and I think they are best placed to decide how to do the catchup.
You think just leave it up to the schools?
Yes. I think they should make the decisions. They know their community, they know their students.
I'm going to endorse the point that listening to professionals is vital to anything that happens going forward. I think with regard to the exact question, I think catch-up is a bit of a distraction, particularly for schools, particularly colleges and universities. Learning never stops, work never stops, we don't close in the summer. There's all sorts of preparation. The idea that people stop working and can invest time in catch-up is, in itself, problematic. To address the question, if there's going to be funding made available, and this will cost money, disadvantaged children taking part in play, in sports, funding for meal clubs, all of the things that families, teachers, children have been asking for I think is what will be crucial in the summer, not some idea of catch-up to pass SATs or pass exams and chanelling money where it is needed and engaging professionals in those conversations, not dictating to them yet more demands on their time.
I think just to use the university and college setting, the expansion of blended learning, which is online and in-person, has already meant that people are at burn-out. The idea that people have a second or third or fourth shift to give during the summer when they are exhausted is not going to happen. If the government does want catch-up teaching prioritised in any sector, they need to be clear about what needs to be deprioritised. to do more if they don't de-prioritise and additionally fund.
Tony, you have a couple of boys. Do you think they would work at summer school?
I think we're all going to be doing catch-up in various stages of education and learning in the next few years. We're going to have people arriving in universities who haven't had the right education.
We are going to have to have universities trying to help them catch up. We are going to have people supposedly leaving college qualifications not fully trained going into the workplace. We are going to have graduates going into the workplace not quite ready. I think we are all going to be in the catch-up industry. I think, yes, of course, there are people who have had a far worse experience, we should be prioritising them but it is going to be true through every place and one of the effects of the last two years.
Beatrice, you are at school. You are in the sixth form. What do you think?
I think that it is so crucial that children are given a break this summer. There has been so much pressure on young people during this pandemic. Then to take this break away from them, I think would just be devastating.
I've seen, you know, awful effects on mental health from my family who are at school, my friends. It has been so difficult. And I think it is all well and good, Jo, saying that teachers need a break. These are young, developing minds, it is a million times worse for them. If we are talking about the implications of adults and their mental health, think about the children. I think it is important that these things are done individually. Most people have had different issues that have shaped them. I think that trying to roll out the same thing for everyone doesn't work, especially when it is young people because everyone leads such different lives and everyone learns so differently. It is not a one size fits all.
Sam, you have five kids. So are you desperate to get them to summer school?
No. Summer is summer. It's our summer. No, I mean, they have been put under enough pressure with all the home learning, parents have been put under a lot of pressure, and teachers as well. I think we all deserve that six weeks of fun time. My two eldest boys who are year 11 and year 13 have been stuck in that bedroom 6 hours a day, five days a week. You know, putting in extra lessons, no, I don't think it is fair. The same with my two youngest. You know, I don't mind if it's an after-school thing a couple of times a week, maybe, during term time, but not during the summer. I just think it is so unfair. No.
Not a total thumbs up we're getting here. I'm sure there are some who support it, but it is interesting what we're hearing.
I had it with my own twins, doing their A-levels, and they weren't enamoured of the idea. But they are also desperate to get back to more structured learning. I think the question has come up because the education secretary being announced 7 million pounds of which 200 million is about how we can do catch-up, perhaps in certain years at key moments, some of which could be during the summer. There are other parts to that, tutoring programmes, mentoring programmes. It is part of a package to try to get the children who have lost out, probably more than any other single group during this crisis.
Because for other groups, although it has been horrendous, and it has been, for children, it is such a formative time. I recognise what Beatrice was saying. It's exactly how my kids feel about it.
Jeremy?
I feel strongly that what the children need is occupation, stimulation, caring, loving, to find a way through -- to escape the year they've had. If summer school is purely about catching up in order to catch up for exams, I'm heartily opposed to it. Some of the most brilliant people I know have failed themselves terribly. It is not about passing exams. We should move away from the system of doing it. There's much more to it.
Anneliese, summer schools, raised by Steph there, is that something you support?
We do feel there needs to be a lot of support for children to catch up. I mean, on average, they've lost -- what? -- over 100 days in schools, many of them. The summer school programme, as I understand it, it is going to be covering 1 in 3 children who received free school meals. This is a small scheme for those who might be keen on attending in the first place. I just think the government has this one wrong. I don't think they are facing up to the scale of the challenge.
People might have seen the Institute for Fiscal Studies released a report that indicated the long-term impact of this period on children. The fact that if it does have that educational impact, that will carry right through into adulthood, into what they might earn during their lifetime. That's not the only thing we look for from education, but it is going to be significant for them. So, looking at this from an economic point of view, I am concerned about that impact on our children. I don't feel the government has sufficient ambition for those children, given what they have been through. I think so far this alleged catch-up plan, it really isn't a plan. It is not a long-term plan to be bringing those children and young people up to the stage where they need to be.
You know, Jo is right, we can't squeeze more out of the existing system. We need to provide the resource, and it will be worth it in the longer term because not doing that will mean that whole cohorts of children and young people will have been left behind, to an extent.
Will.
I couldn't agree more. Three or four weeks summer holiday, schooling, it's a drop in the ocean. It is not going to do anything. It has to be a much longer-term thing here. To back what my fellow audience members have said, this summer is surely about the kids getting out, enjoying themselves, being with their friends, hugging their grandparents, going to pubs and restaurants, getting their hair cut. They need that break as much as everyone else.
We all need to get our haircut. I speak for myself. Jim.
I think it is disingenuous for Anneliese to say that children have lost 100 days. It is disingenuous to the children who have been working really hard remotely -- those children that have been able to, and there's quite a few of them. It is disingenuous to the teachers who have been trying to make it happen for them, and it is disingenuous to the parents who have been helping them as well.
I have two children. When you say to them you lost all your school time, they get upset about it because they have been working hard. It is this thing about them having lost all this education; what they have lost is time with other children. They've lost that time to be children with other children. If there's anything that's going to happen over the summer, then it should be allowing children to be with other children and learning about being with other children. Having fun.