We'll take our first question now, which is Becky.
Thank you, Fiona. Welcome, Panel. Was Boris's nonaction against Matt Hancock yet another missed opportunity to show leadership and set the standard for social distancing?
I don't think so. With all these things, when somebody falls from grace, there's almost a lynch mob in the press. I watched this, I thought it was plain that Matt was going to go. But Boris, I think, made a number of decisions. I'm just reading his mind, the same way you would.
We know what he said. He said he considered the matter closely.
He's an ex-journalist. He knows some don't pursue the truth, they are pursuer of headlines. He knows he is talking about replacing his most important Cabinet member, really, at this point in the middle of this crisis. He knows he is talking about the fate of two families and six children, and so on. I expect what he was doing was creating time for the -- for Matt Hancock to make his own decision. That's what I suspect was going on. I don't know, but that's what I suspect. Frankly, if a Prime Minister shows some loyalty, even perhaps unwise loyalty to a subordinate, I think that's a good thing.
I think I would have done the same thing, frankly, in those circumstances. But let's be clear, the right outcome happened, Hancock went, he had to go. What he had done was wrong, what he did was horrible for all the people that had to live through the traumatic circumstances of small funerals and weddings, seeing their close relatives die without being able to say goodbye, that sort of thing. They will all have felt really, really angry. So he couldn't stay. But I don't think Boris should have done much different.
Interesting. A whole array of hands shot up as you were talking. So you are saying, David, you would have done the same thing. Andy.
I don't agree with David on this. I do think so, you need a prime minister to lead from the front at any time but particularly during a pandemic when extraordinary things are being asked of people, when families are not seeing loved ones who are dying in hospital, that is exactly the moment that the Prime Minister needs to set the standards that the country has to live by. Otherwise, it all falls apart. I think that's where we're getting to. This idea of one rule for them, one rule for everyone else, was introduced by the handling of the Dominic Cummings trip to Barnard Castle, but it is being reinforced by the way the last few days have played out.
I get the increasing impression it is impossible to get sacked from this government. You can breach the ministerial code, you can give contracts to your friends. What would it take, actually, to get sacked?
One minister has been sacked which is Johnny Mercer. This is the only minister to have been sacked since the 2020 reshuffle. He's the only one.
That's my point. I don't think the Prime Minister is setting the right standards. It is particularly important at a time like this. To also just dismiss the feelings that were brought in Question Time, that many families have had not being able to see loved ones, I think it showed he is kind of -- he is not thinking this through properly. I would say that they need to really change how there is a sense of standards being applied to this government, and consistency.
We had another thing this week, that top business executives could escape quarantine. Some are living by some rules, others by other rules. The danger is all the discipline collapses when we need to remain vigilant.
I wondered how many questions would come in on this. I suspected perhaps not that many. We had loads. Lots of hands are up now. Let's hear from some of you. Jo.
I think this is a clear example of how there are huge double standards. This was one opportunity for Boris Johnson to stand up and be counted, to show us he does have a moral compass and he takes that sort of behaviour very seriously. There is a litany of poor behaviour, poor standards in public office, to which he doesn't address. In particular, at the moment, with the acceleration of the vassal programme which they keep referring to as a huge success, which it is, I think that's a distraction from what's going on. I don't understand how the government feel that people will follow the rules now when they have a Health Secretary or ex-Health Secretary that clearly can't and won't follow the rules.
Jack.
Hi. Thank you. Yeah, I'm in total agreement with people who find it absurd that we have to wait for a Tory minister to do the honourable thing and resign. It is yet another example that Boris Johnson either has no conception of moral standards in public office or simply doesn't actually have the power to sack the people who aren't performing or who are ridden by scandals. I'm not sure which is more concerning.
Rose?
I don't say this often but I think David hit the nail on the head there that Boris is treating this as an old boys' club. It is not an old boys' club, it is leading the nation. You put the people first. It is not at all what happened here. It is the tip of iceberg for me. I don't hugely care about this affair story. I care about him giving contracts to people who haven't gone through proper channels, giving jobs to friends and treating the public with blatant disregard. He should have been sacked the moment this came out.
Just listening to the point a number of people have put since this all broke, which is why should we follow the rules when we have seen those in the highest office not doing so.
I think David said something really important. Boris Johnson was a journalist. The problem is he thinks he can still act like a journalist. He is a politician leading the country, so he has to lead by example. During this whole last year, five, six months, whatever it is, I've come across many occasions when people are breaking the rules. When they are breaking the rules they are referring to Dominic Cummings, all these kinds of things. I don't think politicians are anybody special but people do look to them for leadership. Right now it is not an ordinary time. We really need leadership. If Boris Johnson or any other politicians feel they can act like a journalist or act like a businessman or something like that, no, we need political leadership because it is very difficult for me to speak about these things without being emotional. Covid-19 has really affected me and my family. My sister buried people, that was her job, then we got the virus. So when we came here tonight, the Question Time Panel, we were careful. If we have the rulers of our country and their friends not being good examples, what hope have we got for the rest of the people?
Madeline.
If I was in charge I would have sacked Matt Hancock on the spot, too. I think that the position was clearly untenable given his pivotal role. Not just in creating these Draconian and inhumane rules we have had to live by but often going further and taking a harsher line than many of his colleagues. The position was clearly untenable. I think the delay does reflect very poorly on the PM but it brings in real questions, I think, not just about public trust, which has been, you know, seriously damaged by this and many other things, but I think about the level of compliance. I think when you get to this level of disparity and complete double standards and hypocrisy, there are enough things where this government has forfeited the rights for adherence to the rules that still exist. It is not just Matt Hancock, which was outrageous enough, but there are extraordinary inconsistencies about what's allowed. When you see crowds of the size we saw at Wembley, exemptions for the UEFA VIPs, exemptions for business travellers and you see politicians breaking the rules, but it is difficult to organise weddings, visit sick relatives, and difficult for kids in schools because the same testing are in place, people are isolating in large numbers and it is chaotic, expecting this endless one rule for them, another for us. After a while that starts to grate on people. We need a return to some kind of normality and readjust our priorities in all sorts of ways.
Tony.
I think David Davis put it quite succinctly. Matt Hancock clearly made a big mistake. The next day he lost his job. He quite possibly lost his family as well. That's a horrible thing to happen to anybody. I think we should be careful about throwing stones at people. I'm sure we have all made mistakes, all done things we regret in the past. What I would like to know is if this happened on 6 May, why did it take the whistle-blower something like 7 weeks to put the story into a tabloid newspaper? Why did he wait so long to put it into a paper when he could have done something almost immediately? This incident would have been closed something like two months ago.
We have no idea, A, who blew the whistle and, B, when they obtained that footage. It could have been a delay. All that is the great unknown, I'm afraid. Becky, you asked this question.
I did, yes. Just to come back on that. This isn't about the whistle-blower. This is about Matt Hancock, this is about relationships, and about Boris Johnson being incapable of holding his party to account. I agree with what Andy Burnham just said. What is it that you have to do to be sacked for action to be taken? I think in terms of David Davis's comments around there's nothing you would have done differently, well, there's clear gas-lighting going on by Boris here. The matter is closed one minute and he took decisive action the next. It can't be both. When you are stood on a pedestal asking the public to do something but you are ill-prepared to do it, you have to go. As you pointed out yourself, it is inevitable that this person needed to go yet Boris Johnson took no action. So I agree with the audience, complete inconsistencies here, real lack of leadership, really poor.
Chika.
I completely understand the Prime Minister was trying to buy time. He is the leader of our nation. All of us are business owners, the public, and I agree with all of the Panel at home in that I agree with, answered, and we need accountability, we need consistency, we need clarity. For myself as a business leader, my team look to me for direction.
And, you know, this -- as Jo said, he said the case is closed one moment, then a few days later it was, "actually, we fired him". Matt took a role. He accepted the job to be a public figure. And that comes with many benefits, and he has so happily used those benefits. But he is a leader and arguably the most -- one of the most-watched men on our screens. And to have been given the opportunity to resign was a luxury, I think. If he had been working for an organisation, and the government is an organisation, he would have been marched off immediately before he had a chance to pack his bags. You know, the blatant infidelity, the -- I mean, the cheek, you know, and I think, yes, you know, Tony, as you mentioned, he has a family, there are six children involved, but he didn't think about that, did he? He didn't. As a leader he should have thought about that first and then put that first before he behaved how he had behaved. With all of the rules put in place which we are all having to abide by, as Benjamin mentioned, family members who can't come together, weddings being postponed, I just buried my father-in-law, we were limited to numbers. And here is this guy having a good old jolly. It is not acceptable.
David, you had a lot of people -- not all, but most -- taking issue with you. Part of the question from Becky was, was Boris's non-action a missed opportunity to set the standard for social distancing. There has been a bit of comeback with the prime minister seen celebrating England's goals. But the guidance for outdoor events says everyone must be seated if they are consuming food and drink. There are a few people organising weddings saying he's doing that, why is he doing that?
The worst example of that is the G7, with all of them clearly staged, then after that someone took a snap and they were all together. I agree with the fact you have to provide leadership by your action as well as by what you say. You know, as many of you may know, I have been fighting against some of the excessive limitations about this. But I don't disagree. That's why Hancock had to go. He had to go because -- I mean, all of us virtually on this Panel, by the sounds of it, and up and down the country, have had funerals, weddings, other episodes to deal with, which we have suffered.
You wouldn't have sacked him, that's the point.
It is not a political point, I think we are at quite a potentially risky moment in the pandemic. I pick up something Madeline said. There's a growing sense of inconsistency here in terms of how rules are being applied. I'll give you an example. You have parents complaining they can't go to school sports days and see Wimbledon packed out. In our case you have the Scottish government, not all the UK government, out of nowhere hitting Manchester and Salford at the same time as thousands and thousands of people were leaving Scotland to go to London for the football. The danger is governments are behaving inconsistently now. If they carry on that way, people are going to say we're not putting up with this.
I think they already are.
Some might be, but a lot of our audience are obeying the rules.
If you walked up a street in London after the match, there were lots of pubs full of people breaking all the rules you're talking about. That's already happening, I'm afraid. And you're right, part of it is because of the complexity and inconsistency of the rules. We agree on that. Part of it is because the leaders are not showing the way.
Now another question from Stephanie.
Hi. Good evening. The new Health Secretary says we need to learn to live with the virus. What does that mean and how will society look without restrictions?
There's me talking about what September will look like. Benjamin, what's your view? The Prime Minister has already said today that we may have some restrictions in place even after July 19th. We don't know what they will be. How do you see life after COVID? Or living with COVID?
It looks very depressing. I'm kind of half laughing, I don't know why. Every time I come on this programme I bring up the subject of veganism. Evidence shows the more we cut down rain forests, the more we come into contact with animals that don't want to come into contact with us. The animals know better. We cut down the forests, we encounter them. Viruses will keep jumping from them to us. I think Covid-19 is one thing but there's a lot more to come. It is the consequences of our actions. I heard today that it's from a study in the University of Utrecht that human beings are now giving Covid-19 to their pet, to their cats and dogs. Now, imagine if it mutates again and then comes back to us. I mean, this is really scary.
It is talking about very small numbers, and they are not getting particularly ill. But, yes, there is some evidence they can catch it.
Lots of things start not particularly bad and get worse and worse and worse. We have to change our relationship with the environment, with animals, very quickly if we are going to live in a world -- we'll never live in a world free of viruses, but live in a world where we can meet, we can hug, we can party. All these simple things we take for granted.
Do you think you will be happy to do those things after 19 July? Like you arrived today with your mask, after July 19 can you see yourself feeling comfortable just living life as you did before or do you think --
I'm pretty nervous and I have a gig on 19 July. Then I have my band booked for concerts in the summer, and I'm very nervous about it. In fact, when it started I remember they were talking about black men of a certain age who were very vulnerable. That was me. And I'm doing shows with young teenagers and they are spitting their poetry over me. This is very dangerous. We passed that, we've had various mutations, but I'm worried about what is going to happen in the future. When I hear you about coming back in September, I think, yeah, what do we know?
I feel the same. We don't know.
We always had to live with viruses ever since we started getting the liquids and saliva and the blood of animals on us. If we are to keep doing that, we have to face that. I'd rather not. I'd rather the world go vegan.
David, you have been critical of the restrictions. The Prime Minister indicated some of those may continue, who knows how long for. What do you think the summer, autumn going into winter is going to look at.
It depends what happens with the decease.
That's an unknown. Given what we know at present.
It is not entirely an unknown. We can see the trajectory now. People talk about breaking the link between the cases and the hospitalisation and the hospitals. It is not a broken link, it is a dramatically suppressed link. That's working because the vaccines, the therapies are working as well. The aim is to get this to a point where -- it's never going to be non-fatal but less than flu, if you like. Flu kills between 5 and 25,000 people a year and we don't lock down because of flu. So, that's the first thing. Now, assuming we can get there, I want to see us go back as close to the freedoms we had before as we possibly can.
One of the things I'm going to be doing come 19 July is saying okay, what's left over from a year of ministerial decisions -- not Parliamentary decisions, ministerial decisions -- on a vast range of subjects where we have given up our freedoms. I want to see us get back as close as we can to usual. In the middle of all that we are going to be having the government making plans to deal with future pandemics as Benjamin referred to. But we have to get back to our country running as normal. That's what the public want, I think. That's what we ought to deliver.
Amanda, you are shaking your head at that. Why is that?
I don't personally have the confidence to actually walk out in the streets without a mask on. I was on holiday last week, I was lucky enough to get away to Cornwall, and Cornwall, a lot of it is in lockdown because of the G7. The proximity of so many people, I don't have the confidence that somebody is not going to sneeze on me or coughing on me.
The rise in cases in Cornwall is due to the summer breaks. I'm not sure it is quite as clear-cut as that. Andrea.
The only way we can go now is forward. We cannot go back. We cannot go into another lockdown situation. We must come out of this. Of course, we come out of it gradually and that's the right way to go. But, you know, if we look at the pictures we've all seen of people looking at the football -- I hate to go back to the football all the time -- the seating outside was socially distanced for a reason. When you see the pictures of everybody watching the match, everybody is up on their feet, everybody is hugging. Yes, we have to go forward but we still must be careful. There may be less people in hospital with COVID these days, however, there are still people suffering from long COVID, which is a really serious illness. We don't know the impact of people's bodies that has taken yet. So we still have to be very careful when we're coming out of this and we all have to work together to make sure the only direction we go is forward.
Nicola?
I just really hope the new normal in education goes back to schools being back to normal. We're seeing another surge of lots of children isolating at the moment. I hope -- and that's a real priority for the government, to get our children back to school as much as they can, as difficult as it is as we cope with the pandemic. Our young children have this legacy to deal with. I hope we can get the schools to as normal as possible in September.
Chika, what do you think society is going to look like without restrictions or will there still be some restrictions as we go forward? What would you like to see happen?
I think that we need to maintain some restrictions because we -- you know, we cannot afford to go back.
So what kind of things are you thinking?
Masks, for instance, are a small imposition. I think we should remain wearing masks.
What about schools? One in 20 are off school at the moment, certainly in England at least because of COVID.
That's the reason why we really need to maintain some of the restrictions. Because schools and the children have suffered so much and continue to suffer. We speak about this disparity. There's huge disparity between, you know, children who are from kind of less privileged socio-economic backgrounds that have missed a year plus of education. You know, if we are going to be living with this new normal, and of course, you know, as David mentioned, at some point eventually we will go back to a more normal norm where, living with the flu, there are no more school closures, but we have to be on the front foot because we don't know what's coming. We know to expect the unexpected and we do know at some point something is going to come up again.
What the government must, must make sure of is that the way the education system was dealt with has to be really addressed properly. It has to be looked at. Make a plan that, actually, this is going to come back at some point. Maybe not in 2022, it could come back in 2023. Look at the children who did home schooling. Some of them had 60 minutes a day of Zoom classes. 60 minutes. If we are saying that -- my view is it was not handled very well at all. You could say nobody knew it was coming and so we were -- the government were on the back foot. But now that we know a virus of some sort does come up every so often, we have to make a firm plan of these children in state schools, from these lower socio-economic backgrounds who have parents that don't speak the language, who have parents that work full time, the mental health of children, the impact on -- some of them are three, four months behind where they should be. What can we do to ensure that when we do go back into a lockdown and with the rising variant --
If we do. Who knows if we will go back into a lockdown. Some think we will, some don't.
Andy, what does it mean to live with the virus? What will society look like?
I want to start by saying that I like Javid.
He will be delighted to hear that. I'm sure he will be delighted with your endorsement.
But in the last week he has sounded more like the Chancellor of the Exchequer than Health Secretary. He seems more concerned with the economy. I think he just needs to be a little careful about that. I say that in supporting the easing, as some of the Panel have said, you know, I'm not necessarily saying restrictions is the right way to go. We do need to move more to advice and let people manage their way through this and trust people to do that but I am worried, and I agree with Chika about this, I am worried about reports that distancing is going to be dropped and masks are going to be dropped. Now, I don't know if David was advocating both of those things.
You would like to keep all the distancing measures?
You have to keep one or the other. You can't get rid of the distancing and the requirement to wear masks. You have to keep one of those. I was listening to Amanda. You have to think about people who will feel worried about being out there with people without masks. The tram in Manchester, you know, I know that if that goes, some people will feel very vulnerable if they were to use the tram. I think it is better to keep, I would say, the masks requirement.
Even if death continue, they are rising but very slowly -- if deaths continue at -- no one wants any deaths but if they continue at the relatively low level they are you would want to keep either face masks or social distancing.
I think I'm right in saying cases were highest day than they were in January. That's a worry. But you are right to say, Fiona, it isn't translating into hospitalisation. I was discussing the figures just before the show with David. So creeping up. There is a break between cases and hospital admission definitely. But I think the general point is if you get to the middle of July and say, okay, there's no masks, no distancing, the message coming out from the government will be we are back to normal. But I don't think we are back to normal. I think it is a case of living with this thing, as Benjamin was saying. So me, masks are a physical barrier to spreading the virus but a reminder that we are not living in normal time and we all need to look out for each other. I think that is a sensible way to go.
Is that how you would like to see it go, Madeline?
I don't think so. I want the old normal back. I don't want us to turn into China. I don't want to live in a surveillance state. I think that masks -- I agree with Chika that they are a smaller imposition than many, they may be needed for a while longer, but I don't want to accept a future of indefinite mask-wearing. If we are going to live with this in the way we live with flu, that means things like widespread inoculation, giving people booster shots, people who are affected should stay away from work places and schools. But if we are to regain a sense of normality and not fall into the pessimism that many of us are feeling, both fear of going outside and doing things but a pessimism whether life is ever going to return to normal, we got so horribly used to that sensation of the goalposts moving and they moved so many times that we are playing rugby against the neighbouring rugby club, not football any more. I'll believe it when I see it, I think is the feeling. But to regain that sense of normality we need to scrap this obsession with testing kids in schools or devise a better system for dealing with children in schools. Right now there's entire year groups and classrooms are being sent home when one pupil tests positive. That is not sustainable.
I think the reporting needs to change. Right now people are being read out figures that sound scary in and of themselves. You hear about the number of deaths per day or the number of infections, but without the true context and without, for example, knowing where those infections are taking place, if they are taking place in people at minimal risk of infection or complications, that is a difficult proposition. But without that context it adds to the sense of pessimism and fear. Until we get past that, I don't think we are going to be at the old normal again.
The trouble with what you're saying is you're kind of assuming that there's going to be no variant that challenges the vaccine. Benjamin was saying before there could be. The point about saying it has to be irreversible, you might find yourself in a difficult place with public opinion if you assert that, then all of a sudden a variant appears that breaks through the vaccine. What do you do then and how do you get the public to buy back in?
One thing that will have changed after this is the public will be more cautious. In the old days we couldn't get people to take flu vaccinations. Now you will see more of that. The government's plan is going to help reduce the risk of the variant -- a new variant by passing it and so on. In the future we are going to see every September huge vaccination programmes. That will enable us to go back to normal. That's what the plan must be.
Madeline, you wanted to come back in.
I agree with that point, but with variants there has been a tendency to get panicky about a new variant without the grounds for doing so. I think we should deal with the risk that we currently face, not the possible nebulous risk, which I agree is scary, of a new variant coming in which is resistant to all the vaccines. Until we have evidence of that we need to, with the world as we currently have it not on until eventualiality.
I may have sounded heavy when I was talking about the evolution of seeing any of them, and the way we treat animals. But I teach at a university, young adults, and I teach performance poetry. I've had to do it on Zoom this year. It was absolutely terrible. I mean it worked because we had to do it to make it work for Zoom, but it wasn't like teaching in the class. I really want to get back into the classroom. But I've seen the stress on some of my students. I know in other universities and some schools where there have been suicide with kids that can't cope. But in all the answers I've heard people saying, people keep talking about going back to normal. Okay, I'm not going to be heavy, but normal got us here. You know, if you make a mistake, there's nothing wrong with making a mistake, but it is about making the mistake again and again and again. We have to change the way we do things. I just think it seems obvious and nobody is saying it. Everybody is saying "back to normal, back to normal". Normal got us here.
Normal got us here but we don't know factually what got us here. There's lots of speculation.
We know what the coronavirus is. What it comes from.
I've not seen the data that supports that.
It seems to be that it came from animals somehow.
Trust me. It is a wicked virus. If you could draw an evil virus of mankind, that's what you'd draw. It has claws.
We have to deal with what we have now. The idea of schools one minute being open, a classroom being closed, for you, imagine you go back in September, are you teaching in person, then the next week it is on Zoom for those of your students that can attend on zoom, many of them can't. The pressure it puts on families. I have three children. Every time one child gets sent home I have to change my plan. The following week is another child, and it continues. The pressure it puts on families is immense. So, knowing this could be the case and we have this situation now and there are so many children suffering, it's what can we do from today.
We can test. If an individual is found positive, we can send that individual home. I think we can do away with sending home whole bubbles. In families where one person is infected, another person isn't in the same family.
The point Nicola made, we should be having daily testing of the contacts. There are about 400,000 kids at home who are contacts of people who tested positive. That is not sustainable. We have not had policies that have realised why, such as supporting people with no access to sick pay to self-isolate if they are ill. This is a point we made all the way through the pandemic. The government has never dealt with it. You have to deal with things like that. Put booster supplies into the areas where cases have been highest, have an approach that realises that health is poorest in some parts.
Tony.
Yes, Fiona, thank you again. I'm very privileged to work in a vaccination centre. Three weeks ago we were vaccinating people in their mid-30s, two weeks ago early 30s, last week we were vaccinating people in their 20s. At the same time in Durham there was a pop-up vaccination centre in the town centre for anybody over the age of 18. The vaccination programme is accelerating at a phenomenal rate. I'm fairly confident that we will have everybody that needs to be vaccinated, vaccinated quite soon, very soon. Then, come September, we will be offering booster doses for people over the age of 50, I believe, to start off with.
I'm anticipating that come September I will have the flu vaccine in one arm, the COVID in the other arm, and get on with this. If I want to wear a mask, I'll wear a mask. Let people make the decision. If you feel comfortable wearing the mask, wear it. If you feel you have been vaccinated, get on with our lives. That's what we need to do.
One more before I move on.
I think the key thing for me is, if we want our lives back, if we want to have in-person studying and we want to have in-person socialising, we need to understand we can't go backwards. We can't go back to how it was before. As you've already said, that's what got us here. So, if I have to wear a mask to protect people that I want to interact with, because the mask doesn't protect me, it stops me from spitting all over someone else, I should do that. The same way as I should drive my car and not smash into people, I should wear a mask to not give them a disease. If that's what it takes to get the country back to normal, to get in-person teaching back to normal, to get small businesses, to get the hospitality industry, to get performing arts, to get everybody back to normal, if we wear a mask, that's not really a Big Brother state, that's just me saying -- and everybody saying -- oh, I'm not actually going to spit all over you today.
Charming thought. I'm going to take another question from Fatima.
My question is would a Labour defeat be the final nail in the coffin for the Labour Party.
No. Absolutely not.
You are going to say that, aren't you?
I am going to say that. The constituency is not what you might call a typical red wall seat where there has been a Labour majority forever. This is a seat that is more marginal.
Four years ago Tracy won the party's highest ever vote. So, come on.
I was going to come on to say it's not that it wouldn't be serious, it would be serious. I think this is a real challenge not just for Keir Starmer and the Labour Party but the left more broadly. I want to make an important point about this, if I can. We have lived through a decade now, a decade where wealthy and privileged people on the right of politics or even the hard right of politics have posed as the friends of working class people. What they have been trying to do is divide working class communities, make them hate each other, one group to another. That very much is kind of what I see a sense of in Batly. It is almost a sense that you are in a forgotten area and you should feel resentful. The minorities are taking everything. They are taking this narrative into these places. People aren't feeling good because they have a right wing the cancer of zero contracts to spread.
Why are they voting for this government?
I'm saying the left has failed to counter the narrative that has been built over the last decade. It has divided people and made them fearful of each other. What the Labour Party has to do, it can't bring people back together again and say there are policies that bind us all here. We all should be wanting a real living wage for everybody, wherever they come from, whatever community they are in. We should want, in my view, social care for everybody. Social policies coming out of the -- the place we should take population is the current England team. They --
Every politician is trying to attach -- nail their colours to that particular mast.
It is a point because they have been attacked for taking the knee. This is the English working class, lads from all backgrounds, all colours. Actually, you know, the white members of the team have stood behind their teammates and they stood together. I actually take inspiration from them, the next generation in this country who I don't think see people in the same way. We need to take inspiration from that. Bring working class people back to get policies that help everybody. A real version of levelling up. The motto from the England team is if people stand together and fight together, they win together. That's what the left has to start doing and counter -- a decade where some of the wealthiest people around have started saying to working class people, blame your neighbour, who has a different coloured skin from you, for everything. We have to mount a better response to it.
Madeline.
I don't think it is as simple as the government have played divide and rule and hoodwinked the working class into voting for them. I think there is a real identity crisis for the Labour Party, for many reasons. There is a broad political realignment going on. The party is very much stuck in the past. Even the fact that at the time of the great decline of manual labour and so on, yet there is still this disproportionate interest of the trade unions which led to -- probably more left wing than the public would have liked in leaders in the Labour Party. But even the language sometimes sounds like it is from the '70s, saying things like "comrades." As Andy alluded to, and he is one of the best people doing this, but his colleagues are struggling, there's a way of articulating being patriotic that sounds genuine. Many attempt it where it doesn't fit. In a way I feel bad for ear Starmer. Although there is a problem of him lacking charisma and struggling to get his message out to the general public, I think there is some time to go before the party can move past the toxic legacy of Jeremy Corbyn, which isn't something that is going to go away overnight. There was an existing identity crisis and a number of political problems. But you have to wonder what is the purpose of the Labour Party now if it no longer stands for the working classes.
Benjamin, would a Labour defeat be a final nail in the coffin for the party? Would it? Would you want Kier Starmer to go?
No, that's a long way off. But I think it would signal -- it would just be kind of representative of the decline, if you like. I think Andy said something interesting about the Labour Party and the left generally not being able to be an effective opposition. This is happening all over the world. Actually, on the right wing as well, the tory party, they are not being good torys I didn't more. They are not one-nation tore Reese any more. They borrow left-wing ideas when they need you are kind of left wing thing where the government steps in and helps people. I doubt if any modern Tory reporters read Adam Smith, or whether any on the left read Karl Marx. I'm probably the only anarchist you have. When you have a good person -- I'm not taking issue with what was just said, but Jeremy Corbyn was really demonised. When you have somebody that comes up and cares about the working class people, he gets demonised in the press. When he's interviewed he's asked about his clothes, ties, glasses, which are not relevant to politics because they want to make him out to be an odd ball character. Funnily enough, I think they really need to find a new way of doing politics.
It is the idea that the workers are going to put down the tools in the factory. They're not working with tools in factories any more, they are working behind computer screens. Not all Tory supporters are working in the city and financial people. Politics has changed and we have to have new ideas coming forward on the left and the right to deal with the future. I think some of the -- if you talk about Marxism, capitalism, socialism, all those kind of things, what's really going to work for us in the future is something we don't have a name for at the moment because we haven't worked it out.
Chika.
I would say -- the professionals -- I have a few friends, and I've been a journalist for the past week, just -- you know, I have a view on how the election has gone. Call me Mystic Meg, if you will, people feel really forgotten, they feel let down. They feel the opportunities are not what they were. I mentioned the numerous people I know that live in and around Yorkshire. Now I think that --
Would a Labour defeat be the final nail in the coffin for the party?
I think so. Because more and more of them are voting conservative. Better the devil you know than the angel you don't. With the party they have now, they've had the benefit of the furlough, the benefit of getting support during this pandemic and they accessed it quite easily. To go back to a government with, you know, where they haven't felt listened to I think is going to be difficult. If they do lose this election this time, then it really will be very difficult for them to go back and therefore, in that area, it could be the end for them. More and more people are voting Conservative.
If we win, which I think is quite likely, but we'll know in a few hours, is it the end of Labour? No, it's not. I've seen both parties be on their uppers in the time I've been an adult and come back with it. Whether in York or us with 100 seats in Parliament to where they are now. Should they get rid of Starmer? Well, it won't solve their civil war, which is the current problem. Where they can't decide where they are. Neither will it solve the problem they have now.
Andy said the left failed to counter the narrative. No, in the northeast of England the left failed to provide decent representation as happened prior to that in Scotland where your party was completely wiped out because they were so poor at doing their own job of representing the people that they are elected by. What I have seen -- we have both been to Batley. What I saw in Batley is what I saw in the red seats during 2019. A lot of people unhappy with a Labour Party taxes up. Whether it is a demonisation of Corbyn or not. A Labour Party that wasn't pat yobbic, whether true or not, that was the perception. They do think that, as it were, the Tory offering of levelling up is what them the. They feel neglected not over 10 years, over 50 years. Over my adult lifetime they feel neglected. I have some sympathy with that.
Let me ask you, because you have spoken about this a number of times, very recently an article came out yesterday. You said if there was a moment where it was right, I've indicated I would be prepared to go back to -- you talked about your ambitions to lead the party. When will that moment look right for you to try to get a seat in Westminster?
It is not now. I will serve a full second term to the people of with him the Westminster. I want Kier to succeed. I agree with David, the representation has not been what it should be in parts of the country, that was one of the reasons we lost Scotland. But I agree with Benjamin because we do need a new way of doing things. The new way of doing things is what I'm doing in Manchester, what Steve Rotherham is building in liberalism. What we are building as a first rather than party first. It is a big change to the way things are done. Westminster is party first. People switch off from it. We come at it in a different way. It is bottom up, we had a drive until Greater Manchester to end homelessness, rough sleeping, we involved people from all sectors, and it is empowering we made a re change. That is a different way of doing things. I'm beginning to kind of roll back the '80s a little, putting buses back under public control in Greater Manchester. We are building zero carbon homes.
This isn't a moment for you to do your thing about how marvelous you're doing in Manchester. Answer the question.
Well, can I say, am I allowed to say that I won every single ward in Greater Manchester?
Bragging too far. Let's hear from the audience. Quite a few people with their hands up. Carlos.
Benjamin, this might be the first time you're not the only anarchist on the show. I wanted to say that I agree with Andy. I do think it is the Conservative Party promoting division amongst us, particularly amongst the working class that seem to have lost the pride in being. That's where the identity crisis is because it is associated with being poor and not wanting to be seen as being poor. But, unfortunately, the fact is that we still are. And the reason why the government, this Tory government use lots of systems and ideas that were socialist in this case is because they are actually good ideas. The NHS first in our care system. In an emergency they have become absolutely important just because these are great ideas.
Richard.
Thanks, Fiona. Andy, I think you should stay on the role you're doing in Manchester. I heard direct first-hand compliments of the work that you did regarding the bomb interview years ago. I never heard any complements of anything that you did when you were in Parliament. There may well have been, but I never heard of them. Fantastic work going on at a local level like that is surely, surely the way that your party in particular is going to come out of this. You've already alluded to that. Why on Earth would you want to go back into the main Parliament?
We already heard that he does want to, and we'll see it when it comes. Fatima.
If Labour can't hold this seat with this particular candidate that's standing then I don't know about the final nail, but I think it is a hard nail in the coffin. I agree with Chika, it is going to be a really uphill struggle for the party to rally back. I know there are peaks and troughs, but coming so far on the back of the loss in Hartleoole, it is going to be difficult.
Why do you think it's a possibility that they might do so badly.
I think if Labour hold the seat it will purely be because of the locality of the candidates. Jo Cox's sister, and that's really, really important. But there's that particular area, that particular part of the world is not far from where I am, there's a lot of discontent, a lot of disillusionment, a lot of discord between the communities as Andy was saying. People are looking for something different and it's a shame it is not going to be Labour but I think it is --
Well, we don't know that yet, Fatima. We shall see in a few hours' time.