The honest truth to that question is we don’t yet know. It is one of the many things we don’t yet know about the vaccine. The reason for that is in the trials that the vaccines, you test for how effective they are protecting the individual, also how safe they are. If they are safe and effective we can start to roll them out. The early data from the Pfizer vaccine looks like it is 90 percent effective protecting individuals. [DONE] That’s great. So if -- if -- it passes the safety data, and that is a big hurdle it still hasn’t gone over, then we can start rolling it out and it starts protecting people as soon as they’ve -- a week or so after the second dose.
You don’t know if it is 50 or 70 percent of the population.
That’s right. Because the evidence from the trial is how much it protects an individual. You can find out once a lot of people have taken it what the direct impact is on stopping the spread of the disease.
This particular vaccine, Robin, we don’t know if it stops people catching coronavirus but we do know it stops 90 percent of them getting sick from it.
It’s really early. We know it prevents people developing disease for a period of time that it has been studied. We don’t know whether it will protect people for 6 months for 12 months. We have no information right now as to whether it will prevent transmission. So that means its first priority is actually to use it to protect be vulnerable populations.
We have a question on that from John. Can the government confirm that that if and when the vaccine is proved it will be prescribed strictly upon clinical needs.
Yes, that is is our proposal. We have a committee that is made up of clinicians and experts that advises me as health secretary in my formal capacity, the joint committee on vaccines and immunisations. This group looks at the data from a vaccine, and they have been working closely with Pfizer and AstraZeneca, and work out what is the best clinical way of protecting most people. They put out an interim recollection, which is that first we should vaccinate people who are in care homes and the people who work looking after them, and then health and social care workers, then come essentially down the age range. For all the different things like obesity that we know has an impact on your vulnerability to Covid, we know age is the single biggest factor by a long stretch. So the answer to your question, yes, we will vaccinate according to clinical priority because that’s how we save the most lives.[DONE]
Is this a particular concern for you, John? Is that why you asked the question.
I asked the question because I’m probably the oldest person here in the whole audience, but I would be one of those down the line to be affected. I would not be in the first tranche but I’m well over 70 now so I would be fairly close to that. I personally, I’ve heard quite a few people are concerned about having the vaccine, but I wouldn’t hesitate to have it because I know a lot of people are very scared at the moment. Simple as that. [DONE]
Rosie, is it clear to you when someone in your situation might get the vaccine?
No, not really. I know you mention care workers and what about people who still need to work? What about teachers? What about people who work in supermarkets? Where in the line do they come?
The priority is all about protecting people according to their risk from the virus. After we have gone down through the over 65s, according to the proposal, opposite the data that we’ve seen, and they may update it as we see more information, then you go to those who are particularly vulnerable from all age groups. After that, down to the over 50s. Once you get below the over 50s, there is less of a clinical justification for any particular ordering. [DONE]
What do you mean by below the over 50s?
So for people who don’t have an illness which makes them particularly vulnerable to coronavirus, who are aged between 18 and 50, they are the least likely to die from coronavirus so the clinicians who advise me on this expert panel say they come after all the people who are either older or work in health and social care or who have a particular vulnerability. Unfortunately, we know a lot about who is vulnerable to Covid because of having looked at who has been badly affected.
The head of the Covid force said only 15 percent would get a vaccine. This is before the Pfizer announcement was made pel. [DONE]
No, not necessarily. We learned more about the vaccine as time has gone on. The latest advice is we should go in the order I described and then to the under 50s, but not to children because this vaccine has not been tested on children, it is not designed for children and, anyway, children are very, very unlikely to get ill with coronavirus.[DONE]
Two things. One, you didn’t mention Britain’s Black, Asian and minority ethnic which we know are dying disproportionally. There are other frontline workers, care workers and nurses. We can’t have one week the head of the vaccine task force say it is 15 percent, then a week later say, no. Is it less than 50 percent or more than 50 percent?
In a week?
No, the comments you refer to were some time ago. The expert body who advises on this has published its interim recommendations a few weeks ago. Then it will publish the final recommendations when we get the final data about the vaccine -- about any vaccine -- should it be both effective and safe. Those are the two critical things that we’ll look into. [DONE]
If people can pay for it, will they get it more quickly?
I don’t think that’s going to be possible.
Does that mean the government is going to buy up all the doses so people won’t be able to go to a private doctor and say I’d like that. I may not be in this phase, I may not be eligible according to government guidelines, but I’ll buy it so I’ll have it.
I don’t foresee this. It has been hard enough buying this as a government. The deals those who develop the vaccine have done has been with government. We have bought on behalf of the whole UK population, then we intend to roll out according to clinical priority.
Another question from Joe Craft. [JOE]: Is the storage facility in place to guarantee the vaccine?
This is difficult. You need the superfreezers. The Scottish government has bought some of these superfreezers. Are you going to be able to pull this off?
Yes.
You sound very confident. I remember you coming in here and talking about PPE in the first wave.[DONE]
On PPE I remember explaining how difficult it was.
You also said we’ll have it sorted by the weekend.
And we got there. But on this, the NHS is in charge of distributing it. So the UK government is buying this vaccine and the other vaccines, and it is important we have a portfolio, that we have several. And we are buying them for the whole UK. Then the NHS, in each country, in England, Scotland and Wales and Northern Ireland, is responsible for the deployment. It is a challenge. It is incredibly difficult. I would add one more challenge, Joe, you talked about the execution and the storage -- distribution and storage. There is one other part which is in the vaccine Pfizer are doing. But these things are hard to manufacture.[DONE]
But you are not responsible for that. What you are responsible for is making sure people can get it.
I’ll come on to that. But you have to think, they are hard to do the science. They are then hard to manufacture. This thing isn’t a chemical that’s made, this biological. Then it arrives and you have to keep it at -70. We have known that for some time too so the NHS has been getting hold of the serious deep freeze. Then you have to distribute it. It will be a huge effort from the NHS. They are supported by the armed services in doing that. Thankfully, the NHS is a very, very significant organisation that reaches into all parts of the country. So the reason I answered, when you said are you ready to do it, it is something we are working on every day. It will be complicated. It will be a huge challenge, but I’m sure that the NHS is up to it. [DONE]
We need to realise there has been enormous excitement about this vaccine because it is the first evidence that it is a vaccine vaccine-preventible disease. But that doesn’t mean it is going to be the only vaccine. I think what is encouraging, if we also believe the news coming out of Russia, we’ll see a series of vaccines coming through which may have different advantages for distribution. Right now we have to work as if this is the only vaccine that’s going to work but we could have a different conversation in four weeks’ time. I think it comes to this issue of prioritisation. It is a difficult vaccine to get out. There’s about 10 million vulnerable population. If you start vaccinating in January, given that it takes 5 to 6 weeks to get immunity, and you did a million people a week, we wouldn’t get that 10 million vaccinated until way into April, and that’s assuming everybody comes in for their first shot and for their second shot and you are not playing catch-up. So the logistical problem is immense. That doesn’t mean that people should be off the hook, but it is to understand that that challenge is why we need to prioritise the way the vaccine is rolled out.[DONE]
Ellie.
Are we aware of what other countries are doing in regards to the vaccine? Is there much liaison going on with the World Health Organisation? Obviously, China was first affected and, you know, how far are this advanced in interpreters of coming along with a vaccine? Is there much communication there?
Let me get a few questions then we’ll won’t put them to Matt and David as well. Marie.
I was just wondering whether the government foresee any potential supply issues after Brexit at the epidemic of the year and whether that will cause any transportation issues with the vaccine coming into the UK.
I think we might come to that point in a moment. I’m going to park that -- “park it”, that’s been one of the big issues. Eammon.
I think Matt is underestimating the massive challenges that we’re going to have with the supply and distribution of this product. Because I have seen firsthand with the flu vaccination campaign this flu season, we’ve had massive issues with pharmacies running out of stock, using up their stock quite quickly and not being able to replenish that stock. GP surgeries being out of stock for -- having to wait for more than a month to get new stock in.[DONE]
Eammon, you’re saying that as a pharmacist. It is worth repeating the words of Prof. John Bell. He predicted with some confidence that life could be back to normal by spring with the big carveout, assuming they don’t screw up the distribution.
I totally agree with Eammon. As a pharmacist you’ll have seen this. The question I was asked was can we do it. The answer to that is yes, we can.
The question is the storage and distribution infrastructure in place to guarantee it.
Is this going to be an enormous challenge? Of course. This is going to be one of the biggest civilian operations in history. It will have all the challenges that Eammon set out. But I think that the NHS can rise to them and I think that we can come together and we can help make it happen. So that’s what I’m -- I’m confident that we can make it happen. I’m also highly confident that it will be extremely difficult and one of the biggest logistical exercises this country has ever seen. There have been huge challenges in so many parts in response to this coronavirus. Huge challenges. We learned a huge amount all the way through. It hasn’t been easy, but you know we got through so many of those challenges in the past.
I’m sorry, Matt, but it is a bit facile when you say things like “yes, we can.” The point is we heard there have been problems getting out the flu vaccine this year, and we still have to do more, obviously, because flu runs with us right into the spring. We know that you blew 500 billion on PPE that didn’t work. We know that it’s now nine months and 12 days since the first infection in York and we still, in the sixth richest economy in the world, have not got a successful test, track and trace system. So, in the end this is about public confidence. We need people to believe and to take the vaccine, but I think you’re being asked can you do it given that these freezers, you know -70 are necessary to get this distributed. You can understand why people are nervous that we’re going to be well into the summer before this vaccine is properly rolled out.[DONE]
All I’d say is it’s not can I do it, it’s can we do it. This is something that we as a nation need to do together. With the NHS, obviously, in the lead.
Hang on a minute, that’s all very well --
No, people are coming forward to be vaccinated. Everybody participating. In the same way that with social distancing, that’s something we all need to do. Yes, absolutely, this is doable. I’m not saying it is easy, I’m not saying it will be straightforward. I’m just saying we have to do it and we will get it done.[DONE]
It is up to you and the government to lead us and to give us the answers that we’re not getting. As a member of this country, a country that I love, I’m worried and scared because I’m not getting any answers.
Ask the questions and we will try to answer them. One of the challenges of the pandemic is there are all sorts of questions that everybody wants an answer to.
Let’s take some more questions from our audience. Donna.
Thank you. A recent survey found that around 1 in 6 British people were unlikely to agree to being vaccinated against coronavirus. What, in your opinion, in the opinion of the panel, is the best way to reassure the public that the new Covid-19 vaccine will be both effective and safe?
Before you answer that, can I see if there’s anyone in our audience who is hesitating about taking the vaccine, who isn’t that sure about it. Kay.[DONE]
Matt, hi. I’m concerned because I don’t believe there has been adequate time to put the vaccine through the rigorous testing that we would expect it to go through before being given to the general public. What do you say on that?
Ellie?
I would agree with Kay, especially when you look at previous things like thalidomide, things like that. Thalidomide. Are the side affects that could come along with the vaccine?
Jay, I know you had reticence about taking the vaccine as well.
Yeah, I have to say, I do agree with Matt completely because we’re in an unknown -- there’s going to be a lot of unknowns coming up, but staying positive, looking to the future. During the start of the pandemic we got all the volunteers applied to help out. If that can happen again who knows what would happen.
I’m probably one of the cautious people, to be fair. I’d rather wait and see what the effect is first of all. I mean...
So at the moment you’re not sure? Merryn, you wanted in.[DONE]
I just wanted to say that I’m not -- there is a big trust issue around vaccines and looked at the different surveys you can see that between 7 and 25 percent of people will say they are suspicious of a new vaccine like this. So there does need to be some kind of campaign around the safety and reminding everybody of the efficacy of the vaccines that we’ve had over the last couple of hundred years. It is important to remember back in the 1800s, 20, 30 percent of kids died before they were 5. We put in place a vaccine programme since that has brought that down to one in a couple of hundred. But there is around this idea of trust, trust probably a very simple way to make the general population believe in the vaccine and trust in the vaccine and perhaps, at the same time, to increase a little trust in our politicians, which obviously has fallen off quite substantially over the last 9 months. I would suggest that, Matt, you have the vaccine first, and then every other MP has it, and we can rush it out to a couple of top civil servants as well. We wait two weeks, everything is fine, then you can start rolling it out to everybody else.[DONE]
If Matt doesn’t drop to the floor, frothing at the mouth sort of thing.
It will show the population it is absolutely fine.
I would take the vaccine as soon as I’m allowed to. We talked about --
What about taking it to encourage others?
That’s a good question. Because I would be happy to do that. The problem is that would be putting me ahead of the queue in terms of clinical need. Now, because I work in the department for health I count, as it happens, as a healthcare worker. So if my taking it when healthcare workers are allowed to take it, so not jumping the queue, if that would persuade a single other person to take it and give confidence to others, then I’d be absolutely happy to.
Should we do a totally unscientific straw poll. Put your hand up in the audience if you think Matt should be one of the first to take it. Quite a lot but not unanimous. Robin, I know because I have spoken to some of our audience members before we came on that quite a few are happy to take the vaccine as soon as they can get it. We heard from John to that effect. Some people are a little bit more worried about it.
I think it is an important point. Jay’s position to say I’m going to wait and see what happens, is probably a common response. I think we need to remember that, actually, vaccines, next to clean water, have been the single most effective public health implementation globally. They save saved more lives than any other medicines. People are concerned about this vaccine because they perceive it has been done too quickly. We have done a disservice by saying it takes ten years to make a vaccine. Technology is changing very, very quickly. What has happened is that the same number of participants have been exposed to this vaccine, this particular vaccine, 43,000 participants. When you’re looking at side effects, most side effects occur very quickly, within a week or so of having a vaccine. We would see any severe side effect at this stage. And no regulatory authority, whether it is the UK be medicines regulatory authority or the European Regulatory Authority or the FDA will let anything go through that doesn’t have a totally squeaky clean safety record. [DONE]Now, one thing that I think people completely forget is that a vaccine stimulates your immune system, it tricks it to see if it has seen the virus. So you are getting an aspect of a viral infection that’s so much minor than the real virus. So when you think about the risk benefit, the risk of having a severe outcome from Covid-19 far outweighs any theoretical risk of a vaccine. The problem is vaccines are so successful that diseases go away and all you see is the side effects. Pull out any -- par cell Mo approximately, you probably all had it. Look at the potential side effects of paracetamol. If you never taken it before it would probably scare you to take it but you don’t have the same same because you are familiar with it. I think the way we’ll build confidence is when we roll it out to vulnerable populations, who are desperate for a vaccine to get their lives back to some sort of normality and we see it protecting lives, see it being safe. I’m sure people like Jay will see the evidence speaks for itself.
Stuart, you have a question.
Good evening, panel. Yes. For those not in the initial bracket to receive the vaccine, will they still need to abide by the social distancing or even face the potential of going back into lockdown as well?
How is this going to work? Is there to be a section of the population that can party while everyone else has to wait?
Because at first we don’t know whether, even if you had the vaccine you might still transmit the disease, it means we can’t lift those measures on just the people who had the vaccine because you still might give it to somebody else. So what we have to do is vaccinate to protect the most vulnerable and then get to the position where enough people have had it. And we will, of course, monitor afterwards, as we vaccinate the population, to find out the impact on the transmission of the disease. All of this is about how to get life back to normal as fast as possible.[DONE] Another reason to do this, in terms of clinical priority, to your point earlier, the faster we can vaccinate those most vulnerable, the sooner we’ll be able to get life back to normal for everybody else as well. So this is another of those questions that at the moment is unknowable, but the plan to roll out according to clinical priority is the best way to get as fast as possible to as much back to normal as is possible.
Merryn, as far as business is concerned, this is the timeframe they desperately need. When will businesses be able to open up and operate normally again?
This is a game-changer, the knowledge that there will be a vaccine by the spring and let’s say most vulnerable people and older people have been vaccinated by late spring, etcetera, they think I’m sure the entire economy could open up properly. If businesses know that they can move out of this appalling cycle of not knowing what’s going to happen, hyper regulatory activity, lockdown this, curfew this, rules all over the place, up down, up down, not knowing where they are, if they can look forward to a future that is linear, where things don’t change all the time, then they can start moving their businesses around to make them work again. In that sense it is an absolutely game-changer for business. That’s why you saw these astonishing moves in the stock market on Monday when you saw, effectively all the companies geared into the return of normal life, airlines, pubs, etcetera, go completely -- and all the stocks geared into the nightmare we live now, working from home, etcetera, fall significantly. So the economy will be able to look forward to something more linear, less alcoholic beverage.
You have a specific question I know you wanted to ask.
My hand up was to say that there’s a priority list in NHS workers, health and social care workers, etcetera. I wonder where the unpaid carers are, the unsung heroes caring for family members are in this priority list because they don’t seem to be mentioned nationally.
Let’s find out. Are they going to be in the priority list? [DONE]
Defining the social care workers in the --
These are unpaid carers.
Yes, but my goodness, they may be unpaid but they certainly give care.
I’m not downgrading what they do. Will they be in the first phase?
The committee that advises me will define how broad that is.
Would you like to see them in there?
I would like to follow the clinical advice. I know I’m not giving an answer, but it is because it is important we follow the clinical advice.
Ask your question.
Transport is key. How will we ensure that this January importation of vaccine doesn’t have an impact on Covid by the two playing against each other with swaying priorities.
This is something that came up before a lot of members of the audience.
We were told by Boris we would have a deal. We have no deal. We have Boris putting the Good Friday Agreement on the table which jeopardises that deal. We have the chief executive of the Port of Dover saying that a no-deal Brexit could cost us, I think it was a billion a week, and that traffic flows could be down by 40 to 60 percent. The clock is ticking, we’re running out of time, and it is now looking worrying that we’ll have no deal with the European Union. We’ll have no deal, by the way, with the United States of America because we would have risked the Good Friday Agreement by having that no deal. It is desperately important that we get a deal, that it is frictionless trade, that it doesn’t involve tariffs, that we have food safety, health and safety, that we haven’t got queues and lorries backed up and I expect a lot of people in an area like Dover are really worried because a lot of promises were being made. We wait to see what will happen. But we know we now have days -- days -- to deliver this against the backdrop -- just remember, a lot of people were saying look, this is tough. We have all European countries dealing with this pandemic. We have all European countries deal with the economic consequences. Let’s have a little extension while we work this out. No! We’re going to have a deal. We’re going to put the government on the table. It’s a mess, but we need the deal. Over to Matt Hancock.
Hold on. Donna, I know there was something you wanted to add to this particular subject as.
Yes, absolutely. On 1 January 2021, will Dover become a well-oiled gateway to Europe or the biggest car park in the UK?
It all plays into the same thing, A, what is going to happen the end of December, but in terms of us getting the vaccine and getting it through Customs is that going to be a problem? Is this something you thought about, Robin? Is this a concern for you?[DONE]
I haven’t thought about this in terms of what the immediate priority is. But we certainly realise in the UK, particularly as we go through Brexit, that we need to really ramp up UK manufacturing capacity so that we can make vaccines. And we have cutting-edge technology in this country. I think one of the things that we recognise is that from a pragmatic point of view, we have made -- the government has made purchase of six vaccines, five of those are from overseas. That’s increasing our reliance on overseas production.[DONE]
You are involved in developing a vaccine as well at Imperial College London.
We are one of the two UK teams developing a vaccine.
Are you getting funding from the government?
We are getting government. But it still requires a huge effort for us to build a technology from scratch. To give the kind of examples of the competition, there are 30 R&A companies around the world.
This is the particular technology that Pfizer used.
It is a new technology that’s at a tipping point. Our direct competition are two companies in Germany, one of which is BioNTech, they got grants from the German government of 350,000,250 million apiece, even though they are well-funded. So we need to think in terms of the strategy as to how we’re going to nurture the vaccine industry, which is more than just start-up, that is sustainable and has a long-term strategic plan.[DONE]
Are you getting those kind of funds from the secretary for health here?
We are getting support and we fully anticipate that the government will want to see the two flagship programmes are supported to the hilt.
Daniel.
Picking up on the points, will the defeat in the house of lords of clauses obvious the Internal Market Bill -- this mopped be impact on internal policy, especially with president-elect enjoyeden.
Antonio?
My question is for Matt. Matt has mentioned that there are several companies, several deals going on regarding the vaccine. I just want to know, these pharmaceutical companies involved will make enormous amounts of money. My question to Matt is this. Does the government have any strategies in place to ensure that these pharmaceutical companies give back to the country from their profits to make sure that everybody in the UK who wants the vaccine can have it, rather than being held to ransom or on what they can produce and what the government wants to pay for the vaccine?
Justin.
While this announcement is welcome, does Mr Hancock think it goes anywhere to increasing an apathetic population who have been drip-fed a series of failures, costly failures and double standards?
Joe.
Yes, I think the arguments are given that the NHS will be able to manage the roll-out, the NHS will do it. The NHS relies on subcontractors to do the job of rolling it out. Recently the vetting has suffered and I’ve also heard rumours that there are simply not enough medical grade vials or lorries around or even PPE for the rollout of this vaccine. So to say the NHS will do it, well, the NHS can only do it if they get the support to do their job. So, you know, it would be a monumental waste of money to buy the vaccine and then not having it transported and it becoming ineffective.[DONE]
Lots of different points there. I’m going to drag us back to the original question which came from Andy about confidence about getting the vaccine through post the end of December. We hear all sorts of warnings from road hauliers about not being ready, about holdups at Customs, lorry parks, all the rest of it. Are you confident that that’s not going to be a problem?
We have a plan for the vaccine that is being manufactured in Belgium. If necessary we can fly it.
That is a lot more expensive than coming through a lorry.
The importance of the vaccine can’t be underestimated so we have to plan for all events. Many of the points made some of the points about some of the challenges, like Joe’s point about the fact the vaccine needs PPE, absolutely, that’s a critical part of the plan. So it underlines how this is a hugely complex project but it is one that we’ve we’ve been preparing for for some time.
You’re confident that Brexit, if we do leave the European Union without a deal, is not going to hold up the delivery of the vaccine to this condition?
I am confident in that. We have a plan, yes.
I’m sat here increasingly getting annoyed because I think we’re hearing great points and you’re just taking the easy questions and giving one answer and then moving on. I wanted to come here today and talk about the vaccine and feel reassured that we’re going to go into 2021 and be in a much better and safer place, and I don’t know if we will be.
I absolutely think there’s a point, which is that this vaccine that we heard about on Monday, it is good news, but we’re not there yet. And there are still a lot of steps that we need to get through. So I’m only going to reassure you and anybody else as much as I can be confident about.
You’re not reassuring me at all. [DONE]
Well, I’m being honest about the uncertainties that we still face. I think that’s what I’m duty-bound to do. There are some things I am more confident about. Like, for instance, we’ve done the work to make sure we have the -70 capacity.
Can you even tell us when people might first get the vaccine?
Well, we’re planning that if all goes well, including the safety coming through, and including the manufacturing going well by Pfizer, we’re planning to be able to roll out from the start of December, which isn’t long.
One of the cofounders of the company manufacturing this vaccine said not before mid-December. You’re not on the same page there.
As I say, we’re planning to be ready from 1 December but we are not guaranteeing that by any stretch. It would be easier in the moment for me to say: No problem, it’s all sorted. We’re not there yet. But what we can say is we’re making progress towards where we need to be but there are many, many hurdles still for us to go over.[DONE]
Merryn.
I just wanted to work on reassuring Rosie’s anxieties because I think we’re talking about the vaccine at great length which is interesting and exciting and I hope we’re at the beginning of the end of the whole thing but we’re not talking about the various treatments that have been coming along. While we wait for the vaccine to be rolled out and for everyone to get it there’s a cheap steroid that is working quite well, there’s a UK-based company that is in phase 2 trials on using a drug that is known to be very safe and cheap working in different illnesses that could work well for this and these clinical trials is shown to be. So it is not just about the vaccine; it is also about the fact that we know very good treatments are there, we know that death rates have been falling during the second wave compared to the first wave. We know the mortality rate as a whole is very low and we are learning more about how and where it transmits. I’ll sure we’ll get on whether lockdown is a good idea later, but we know you don’t get get Covid-19 when you’re out shopping. So we are learning we can live our lives whether the vaccine is rolled out or not.
You haven’t had a chance to answer the question about trying to get the vaccine through if we leave the EU without a deal.[DONE]
I think I have to leave that one to Matt because I’m sure there are special arrangements for getting vaccines through very long lorry queues. But I really, really hope that the government has that organised. The wider question is presumably about Brexit and whether there will be long lorry queues in Dover if we go through on WTO terms. The answer to that is there probably will be very long queues in Dover, but there probably will be long lorry queues regardless of whether we have a deal or not because all change that involves lots of pieces of paper and admin and new organisation results in difficulties and holdups and blockages. But that will, I would guess, only last two or three months before we come out the other end. That will be unpleasant for those involved in it but if you believe Brexit is a good thing for the country for a long time, it will be a relatively small price to pay, I hope.[DONE]
A different question on another topic, from Jay.
Having had a Disability Discrimination Act for 25 years, are we now treating people with more respect and equality?
Rosie, I’m not trying to pigeon-hole you here, but in a sense you are the obvious person.
Why?
I can’t imagine. But give us the benefit of your experience.
The Disability Act came in in ’95. I was 5 years old and, without a doubt, my life has been better because of it. I had an education in a mainstream school. I went to university. I got a job, and with my cerebral palsy have been a successful and independent human being. And I am proud of who I am and I can wee in disabled toilets and park where I want because of this groundbreaking Disability Act. Saying that, 25 years on and whenever I walk in the street alone, I wear headphones because of how I walk and I talk, I get abuse on a daily basis. I am not alone in that. I am not alone in that. I have had times of unemployment. Unemployment is huge among disabled people. I tried to apply for jobs and I have been hung up on because of how I speak. And I’m not alone because right now a quarter of a million disabled people are unemployed and because of Covid, that is rising. [DONE]I was going to say that disabled people are overlooked. But they’re not. They are deliberately ignored because disabled people need more care and more money and I don’t feel like, as a disabled person, I am getting the care and support I need right now.
David?
Well, I mean, it’s hard to follow that.
It is.
That was very moving to listen to. Look, I suspect, of course, there’s been progress over the last 25 years, but we’ve got a long way to go. Let me just say, I have three children. One of them has special educational needs and I know the struggle of parents in this country when they’re trying to get a statement. Of course there’s still huge discrimination in employment. I was thinking of the black student dragged out of the union, blind, just a year or so ago. I think there’s a lot to do in this country. We probably have to return to the legislation that’s required. If you look at that story of the 20th Century, it’s a lot of people at the beginning of that century, certainly the disabled, anyone with occasional needs, black and brown people, women, working people, all oppressed in some ways, put down, and by the end of the 20th Century beginning to get their rights. But we are still on that journey. As we go into a deep recession, we know that the people who can be deeply affected are those with disabilities. Let me just say, if you defund local authorities like we have in this country, if you have local authorities like Croydon or Northampton going bust, with big cuts of 50 percent, where is the money for adult social care that the disabled depend on? Where is the money for the kit and equipment that people need in their homes? All the money being cut in day centres right across the country. So it is not a rosy picture. In some ways it feels like a rolling back. I endorse what has been said.
Merryn.
I haven’t much to add to that, except to say from what we hear is obvious that there are not that many families in the UK that aren’t in some way touched by the difficulties of having someone with a disability inside their family. Obviously, there’s a lot more to be done to help everybody with that. But I would also say we mustn’t underestimate how far we have come in the last 25 years. Everybody now understands, which I don’t think they did then, that lack of access to transport, to education, to employment, etcetera, was a travesty and now is considered to be something that everyone should have access to. So there has been huge change over the last 25 years. Obviously, there’s a long way to go but we must remember how far we’ve come as well.
I was surprised to learn that rules on public transport, on coaches and buses, come into effect this year, so many years after the Disability Discrimination Act. Huge percent are not accessible.
I just want to applaud Rosie for challenging you all on that. I want to raise an issue that was mentioned about SDN and children struggling in schools. The delays for diagnosis of difficulties is three years. Covid is going to increase that delay. Disability Discrimination Act gave us us the rights to education. There are lots of children who can’t access education because they are still waiting for a diagnos. What is going to be done about that?
Donna.
I think England it is important remember that any one of us could become disabled at any point in time. So when we’re supporting an increase in access for disabled people we’re actually supporting ourselves, we’re supporting the entire country. So I think looking at this as, you know, as issues that are just for disabled people is just -- I don’t think it is helpful. It is about how do we increase access for all of us, including disabled people. That’s how I think we should look at this. [DONE]
Is it a matter of adding new legislation or becoming a less judgmental society?
I admire you so much, Rosie, for the way that you articulate this. I thought what Emily said was so strong, in a small way I have -- I am neuro-diverse, I’m dyslexic. It took me until I was 18 until I was diagnosed. Then I got the support I needed and it made an enormous difference to me. But I was lucky because I was able to get by on my maths and my -- despite the fact that my language skills were very poor, my written language skills, at school. So I felt just a tiny bit of what that feels like. But I think that Daniel’s point is just so important, which is, of course of course legislation is important and that is something we should always be pushing forward, like the change of the buses at the end of this year. I didn’t know about that. It is really important. But how long has it taken us to get to that point. But it is about society accepting everyone and looking for the good in everyone. I think that everyone has something to contribute and we need to go and -- it is our task, our mission is to go and find what is good in people and the contribution they can make and bring it out and support people to do that. So I think there’s a long way to go.
Rosie, we’re almost out of time but I wanted to give you the final word on that. [DONE]
I think I’d kick myself without talking about the change between the DLA, Disability Living Allowance, to the Personal Independent Payment because 650,000 disabled people, including myself, got caught. And it just makes me insanely angry that I thought when I was assessed in 2008 that money that kept me going, that gave me support, it was taken off me. Luckily, I can work harder. I can push myself. But a lot of disabled people are now on the poverty line because they were assessed by a stranger for 10 minutes who would look at them and go: Oh, what do you need? That makes my blood boil. Yet I want to end it by going stop ignoring disabled people. We make up 22 percent of the population. We’re here and we’re worth listening to. [DONE]
Rosie, look at that. If the people here in this studio with us, you’d see the applause. You’d hear it. You can only see it.