 Okay. So, in the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests, will the panel commit to educating the citizens of the UK about the atrocities of the British Empire, take down the statues and the portraits that represent slave traders in the UK, and people who profited from Empire really. And will you apologise for paying off the owners of slaves that the British people were paying off until as late as 2015?
 Well, I think we’ve got to confront our history warts and all, and whilst there are many things we can be proud about with regard to Britain and its history, there’s a lot that we need to confront and be honest about, that is bad about our history. But, I think that applying today’s standards to what may have happened many hundreds of years ago, is a difficult concept, to say the least. And I think rather than using the language of blame and apology, we should be being honest about it, being forthright about it, using democratic processes wherever possible to deal with it. So, let’s take for example, particular statues to slave traders, that might be in Bristol or elsewhere, use the democratic process to, through a proper decision, decide what to do with that particular memorial or statue…Bernadine Evaristo You know, a lot of people in this country don’t understand the colonial history, or they understand it through a certain prism, where they feel that Britain went and travelled all over the world, in order to help people. You know, there is still a section of society who don’t think slavery was a really bad thing.So, I think it’s really important that we interrogate history and when you have to take the law into your hands and remove a statue, I mean, God, nobody died, you know, it’s just this little tin statue, whatever it was, that was thrown into the river, and it then led to this conversation that we’re having now, about the rest of the relics of Britain’s murky past, then I think it’s really important.
 Robert?
 So, do you think the people were wrong to tear it down then?
 I think they were. I think that, whilst I absolutely get and understand the huge strength of feeling that’s been engendered as a result of that appalling incident in Minneapolis, and the fact that many people have just had enough, and I get that utterly, I do think that we all owe it to each other to respect the rule of law, and to within that, work for greater equality. And I think the scenes that we saw in Bristol were disturbing, in the sense that there didn’t seem to be that sense of order…
 You’re Justice Secretary, do you want to see those people prosecuted?
 Well I think an investigation is ongoing, and we’ve got to let the police do their job, independently, and let the prosecuting authorities follow the evidence wherever it leads.But, the point I’m making is that if we stand for something together and collectively in this great country, it’s got to be the rule of law, and those values of freedom that attracted so many people here in the first place, and make this country, whilst it is imperfect, and whilst there is a huge amount for us to do, a good place to live, because we have that underpinning of the rule of law and democracy. Let’s celebrate that, but let’s be honest and confront the past as well.
 And let me just…Tessa, when you said that you want the government to apologise for reparations paid to countries until 2015, for slavery, what are you referring to?
 So yeah, so the debts that we were paying off, refers to the 20 million pounds that was paid off to slave owners, when slavery became illegal in 1837, and so that debt is something that the British Government was paying off until as late as 2015.
 Robert?
 Well, look I think the history of our islands is always with us
 But, were we paying off that debt until 2015?
 I think actually, the lady is right, because I’ve read reports similarly about that…
 That seems extraordinary.
 But I think she makes a very powerful point about the fact that you cannot escape history, and I think it would be fundamentally dishonest of us to, through removing statues and airbrushing out history, to then pretend that all was well. Do you know, totalitarian regimes do that? And communist regimes and other extreme regimes do that sort of thing, and then pretend that all is well, no we need to be honest, face up to it, and accept the fact that we are as much prisoners of our history, as anything else, but we have a chance through democracy, to break free, and progress.
 Bernadine?
 Yes. I totally disagree with you actually. Because I absolutely relish that statue being toppled in Bristol. They had tried for decades to either get the statue removed, or to get a plaque put on the statue, to provide the context for Colston’s history as a slave trader. And I think everybody now knows that he was culpable in terms of some 80,000 Africans being enslaves in the New World, and 20,000 of those Africans were also lost at sea.So, I think he was a really toxic symbol in Bristol, and it was really important that he should go, or at least be contextualised. And people tried to do that, and they tried for decades. They didn’t get anywhere with it. So, it felt to me that it was totally right that they should topple that statue, because of what he represented, and I am totally for a lot of the other statues in this country, being removed, and perhaps recontextualised in museums, or somewhere where we actually understand what role they played in society in a wider sense, and the whole idea about…
 And which kind of statues for example, Bernadine?
 So, there was somebody removed from outside The Museum of London, for example.
 Yes, Robert Milligan who’s a slave trader.
 And would you want to see his statue come off Nelson’s Column?
 Well, I think we need to have that conversation, probably. But, there is also this argument that’s come up, in terms of the statues, that we can’t change history and that it is the history of this country. But actually, history is a construction. Okay, events happen, we have a past, and then historians contextualise that past and interrogate it. And what’s happened in this country, is that historically that has been done by elite white men, who have been the historians, who have set the framework for the events of the past. So, history is something that needs to be challenged, and re-interrogated, and revised constantly.And removing those statues, in a sense it’s giving power to the people who really do object to a symbol of their historical slavery and all their allies as well. The other thing about history, is that history has always excluded primarily women and people of colour, and working class people and LGBTQ+ people, in the ways in which it’s been told. And that also goes to what you were saying about the colonial history.
 And when Tessa talks about removing statues or portraits of anyone who has profited from Empire? I’m sort of wondering where does that…
 Well…that’s the country, that’s the country isn’t it?
 Yes, exactly.
 But I think the visual symbols, the statues are really toxic, and they really are an affront to our shared humanity, and I think at least we need to look at that. And, do you know, Britain was built on the wealth of slavery and colonialism, that’s the truth. And we don’t really admit that.
 Rocco?
 Well, there’s a quote of Nelson Mandela that says, ‘Hiding our history is not the route to enlightenment. We have to understand our history and we have to confront it.’ And I agree very much with what Robert Buckland was saying that we can’t judge the past by the values of today. And it seems that people are trying to use the evil of slavery to re-write the history of this country, and try and negate the heritage that this country has. 
 So, do you think it was wrong to take down the statue of Edward Colston?
 Yes, I think it’s wrong to take it down in that way, and I think any vandalism of any kind is completely unacceptable. It’s against the law, and it’s disgraceful that the police were not there in sufficient numbers to prevent that happening. 
 I mean, people have made comparisons…
 The worst aspect for me, of the London demonstration was seeing police running away from demonstrators in fear. That’s a breakdown of law and order, and it’s mob rule. And it’s completely unacceptable.
 And when you talk about vandalism for example, I mean one example that’s been quoted, and I’m not equating the two, but The Berlin Wall, for example, which obviously people just pulled down themselves, and the police stood by and just let it happen, but that’s…I’m not trying to say the two are the same, but nonetheless it was…
 The two things aren’t in anyway comparable.
 Well, no, but the argument that is made that it was something that people took upon themselves to do…
 It’s amazing that we are obsessing about statues of long forgotten people at a time when the country’s sleep-walking to economic disaster, and our children are being prevented from going to school.
 Well, we may well come to that Rocco, we’ll deal with one thing at a time.
 No, it’s mind-boggling.
 Okay, well let’s talk to some of our virtual audience that’s got their hands up,
 I think it’s important that as a society, we look at the past, but we don’t need to glorify or celebrate the events of the past that we as a nation took part in. I agree that statues that have links to the past, that bear issues relating to slavery, do need to be taken down. I’m not asking for them to be hidden, I think they need to be in a museum, because museums are great places to educate and help remember the past. Maybe even have history about British colonialism or minority ethnic communities in the curriculum, I think that would be an important step that we could take as a society?
 Fion?
 If you think about the people that it’s affected, the ancestors of the people that walk past it every day, would it not be disturbing to see someone glorified, when they have killed thousands of people and are being celebrated in a way so publicly, so I just don’t agree exactly with what Rocco or what the Justice Secretary had to say there, that it’s disturbing or in some way that it’s in anyway worse than going the democratic way, when there’s still people trying to justify what that man did.
 Elaine?
 Hi, I like the idea of Tessa’s second part of the question, because there will be equal measures on both sides. I’m really interested in how we’ll all come together and have a critical conversation about how we can go forward with this issue.
 Well, let me come to John Williams on that. John, you wanted to take this question forward?
 Yes. So, will the possible taking down of 60 statues in the UK, advance the cause of Black Lives Matter?
 So, Vaughan, I mean this just leads on really from Tessa’s question, whether or not taking the statues down is productive, I don’t know whether you approved of what happened in Bristol, and is it perhaps obscuring a larger, or helping a larger discussion?
 in the recent past, too. We can all learn from this, and take the opportunity in this extraordinary global movement, to reset, not just our view on our past, but much more importantly to make changes to our shared future.
 And Liz, obviously you’ll want to respond to what Vaughan has said, but also just looking at John and Tessa’s questions, they’re in sense two sides of the same coin, you know, should we be taking statues down, remove portraits commemorating people who had profited from slavery, or profited from The Empire, Tessa’s saying, or is that in a sense counter-productive, in terms of looking at the bigger issue?
 Now there’s one thing that I just could refer back to, what Vaughan said, and this is a little bit disappointing, because frankly Vaughan, I think we are trying to fight from the same corner here, and you do know that Plaid Cymru of course, Adam Price has called for an enquiry into structural racism in Wales, it was in response to his questioning that the first minister of Wales responded with supporting the concept of a black and minority ethnic museum in Wales, and also it’s been Plaid Cymru who’s been leading on perhaps the major point, which is changes to the curriculum.
 But what Vaughan’s referring to is obviously, Adam Price apologised for comparing Wales to a kind of colonial outpost?
 Yeah, when we’re looking at the real big issues of politics one of the rather petty things that we do in politics in the United Kingdom is bring it down to personalities, and these are big, serious…
 There’s nothing petty, it matters.
…questions. Now, looking at the statues, and I raised this yesterday with the Prime Minister, of course, what we have within the United Kingdom is the way of presenting history very much through the eyes of the Conservatives. And the Prime Minister, when I asked him on this question, is that Conservatives don’t pull down statues, Conservatives don’t pull down statues. It was the imagery of the past. And I know that the Lord Chancellor will agree with this, we have much legislation in place to deal with racial hatred, but we know that we still live within a racial society, which acts upon racialism and racism.

, the curriculum needs to change. The War of Independence is depicted as the Indian Mutiny. That needs to change. Especially children who are born and bred over here. My son considers himself as Welsh. And for him to read history in a different manner than what I have read, and what I’ve read recently, I think it’s important that violence should be condemned, but racism from top down, needs to be dealt with.I’m very proud to live in Cardiff, and work in Cardiff for the last 25 years, it’s a multicultural society. But we need to make sure that from top down, from Boris downwards, we need to deal with this racism.
 And Robert, what, I mean we heard the Prime Minister talk about this at Prime Minister’s Questions yesterday, the comment he made about piccaninnies waving at the Queen, and watermelon smiles, has come back time and time again to haunt him. What are we going to see from the government, if anything?
 A Prime Minister who was major of probably the most cosmopolitan city in the world, and was elected twice, and whose approach to issues of migration and multiculturalism has been open, liberal and inclusive, and his remarks in the aftermath of the unlawful of George Floyd, I think were appropriate, they struck the right tone, and he talked in a positive way about what needed to be done. So, I think absolutely, we have the right approach. I think that sense of trying to bring people together, is what we need now. And I think a lot of the remarks, I think, are on the money when it comes to the fact that rather than focusing upon icons and statues, actions speak far louder than words, and Vaughan has made the point about the criminal justice system, I have responsibility for that in England and Wales, I absolutely take responsibility for the need to improve the way in which we deal with black and minority ethnic people in that system. And there’s a whole range of things that we are doing, no time to go into them now, but the sort of practical measures that we’ve got to do, to make the experience different…
 Could I ask one specific question there, please? The black population in Wales is over-represented by five times within the prison population of Wales, surely that is a desperate failure? That is an indication of the racism in our society in action. Would you, as the Secretary of State for Justice, commit to using that as a target to reduce that percentage, that unacceptable percentage within the prison population, specifically in Wales, but of course it applies through England and Wales entirely? 
 Well, what I commit to Liz, is making sure that the problems that are inherited by the criminal justice system, are dealt with further up the line, and the diversions that are needed in order to help people of that background, not to get into the system in the first place, are what we’re going to have to do. And that’s not just me, that’s Education, that’s Health, that’s Housing, that’s the whole apparatus of government, in Wales and in Westminster, actually coming together around the problem and the individual, rather than this silo approach that means that I end up being responsible for a system with a disproportionate number of young people from that background within it.
 Bernadine are you…?
 I just think that mealy mouthed refusal to engage in the reality, the Prime Minister has said something deeply offensive at the start of the 21st century, it is a real issue. For people that look like me, having a Prime Minister who used the language of watermelon smiles and piccaninnies, it matters, just as someone comparing the experience of Wales to colonialism and the African American experience, it matters and it’s offensive. And if we want to move on, we’ve got to accept that isn’t acceptable, and you gain credit for yourselves and your parties, and actually the healing that I want to see taking place right across the United Kingdom knowledge that is staring you in the face. ’Cause it isn’t just the fact that I’m a politician, I’m this colour every day of the week, every single day of the year, and it matters to me that we are spoken about and treated in a way that reflects who we are, and not the colour of our skin. So use language that matters and make sure you’re not making these mealy mouthed apologies for things that are plainly wrong
 I think that, you know, I’ve found Boris offensive all along, with his journalism in The Spectator, with the racist things that he said. When he became Mayor of London, yes, he became mayor of an incredibly multicultural city, but one of the first things that he tried to do, was to get rid of Black History Month, right? So, we’re talking here about the importance of history and acknowledging the past, and also we should be celebrating the entire population, people of colour and our contribution to this society, we’ve been here since the Romans, it’s something I’ve written about, and we have a mayor who tries to get rid of the single thing that we do, to bring to the wider public, the fact that we have a history. And in fact, the truth is, of course, black history is British history. This is a multicultural country and always has been. And British history is world history, because we had an Empire, that ruled over a quarter of the world, for a very long time. So, I really don’t accept you apologising or trying to present Boris Johnson in a good light, because I’ve found him deeply offensive.
 Robert, could you…I’m going to move on in a moment, do you want to respond to that. This is the Prime Minister after all, this is the leader of your party?
 I would say that journalists write lots of things, and writes lots of polemic and lots of things that they would come to regret, and not to choose to do…Vaughan Gething [Voices overlap 00:25:29].
 No. I would say this, that…
 Has the Prime Minister ever said that he regretted using those terms?
 Look, I can’t speak for him about what might have been written 15 or so years ago, I’ve got to judge the person on his actions as an elected politician, and what I’ve seen is somebody who absolutely understands the challenges we face, accepts them, faces up to them, and wants to do something about them.
 Okay. Alright, let’s…this is a subject we could talk about for the entire programme, I know. There were lots of other questions that came in as well, on other things, so I’m just going to move on now, to Rosina Allen?
 Hello. Good evening. Like myself and many other independent restaurants, our restaurant is very much family based, and five of our family members are dependant on that business. Since Covid-19 has come around, social distancing seems to inevitable in hospitality. Once lockdown is lifted, we imagine 25 to 50 per cent of our capacity will only be achieved, and we feel that only fixed costs may be covered, or may not be covered. In the short term and the longterm, what strategies will the government and stakeholder organisations put forward for our industry, taking into account there’s so much debt already been created by independent family business now?
 And Rosina, you mentioned social distancing, of course two metres in this country is the acceptable social distancing. Rocco, I’m going to come to you obviously, first, with your hotel business.
 Well, yes, this two metre social distancing rule has sort of come out of the blue, there’s no scientific evidence behind it. The WTO has just come out and said, if you’re two metres away you have a one per cent chance of catching the disease, and if you’re one metre away you have a three per cent chance of catching the disease.
 This is the WHO, the World Health Organisation?
 Yes, WHO. The reality in continental Europe, which has started to open up, is that they’ve gone back to one metre.
 Some of them, not all of them have, but yes, some of them have. So you’ve got, what have we got? We’ve got China?
 A lot of them have. So, Italy has and Germany has and…
 Germany is at one and a half metres, as is Italy. France and Denmark are at one metre at the moment.
 And Spain is higher
 And the reality of this whole thing, is no one is concentrating on the economic impacts of this, and the reality of this disease, which at first was thought to be a terrible disease, and was going to kill millions of people, it’s not turned out to be like that. A lot of the surveys that have been done show it’s 0.1 to 0.2 per cent of people, who die if they catch the disease and the reality is…
 The other suggestion is one per cent, and in some countries higher.
 Well, I don’t know, no, I mean the only thorough research that’s been done, was one done by Stanford on the New York epidemic, which is one of the hot beds in the United States, and it’s come out with these figures. So, the reality of this disease is that it hits, the average age of people who’ve died in this country is 80. A third of them have died in the care homes, it’s a disgrace what’s happened in the care homes, but it’s…
 But when it comes to the hospital industry, for example, and obviously Rosina’s talking about her restaurant here, if the government sticks with this two metre social distancing, is it going to be viable for you, for example, to open, you’ve got hotels around the world?
 No, it isn’t. It isn’t.
 You’ve got hotels around the world, but do you have them in this country?
 There are a number of aspects to hotels opening and so on, a lot of hotels in this country depend on international travel. If there’s no international travel, they won’t have customers, they won’t be able to open.
 So you’re opposing the quarantine as well?
 Yes, of course. Yeah, I mean the quarantine, again, it’s got no scientific evidence behind it. The chief scientific officer says it’s a political decision, not a scientific decision. We’re closing down, and the rest of Europe is opening up. Until Sunday you could come from Iran or Brazil, the two highest hotbeds of the disease, with impunity, and all of a sudden on Sunday evening, no one could come in.
 So, can I just ask you, so with your hotels in other countries where the distancing is a metre or one and a half metres, can you open economically, profitably, with that kind of social distancing?
 It’s still difficult, but a metre makes it possible. I mean, the tourism industry has suffered disproportionately, effectively it’s been without income since March, and will continue to be without income in this country until July, so that’s four months, a third of the year, and many, many businesses in the tourism industry will go under. You impose quarantine which stops foreigners coming into this country, just when there was a chance to save something out of the summer season, it’s another nail in the coffin, a two metre rule makes it impossible for the people to open properly.
 Vaughan, when it comes to Wales, the First Minister has said he doesn’t expect most of Welsh tourism to be running this summer at all, at best hope self-catering, so what do you think in response to what Rosina said and what Rocco Forte has had to say?
 Well, it’s difficult, but I’m very proud of the fact that our government in Wales, has as our priority how to keep Wales safe. We’ve taken a deliberately cautious approach to easing out of lockdown, because I simply disagree with Rocco’s characterisation of Covid-19 and its impact. It is a dreadful disease, it’s taken thousands of extra lives, tens of thousands across the UK, and would have taken many more if we hadn’t imposed lockdown when we did. And I don’t think you can try to balance off health against economy. If we come out of lockdown too quickly, we’ll not only see lives lost, we will see a much greater impact upon our economy. So, we are looking at a range of measures that we take, which have more economic activity take place, but to do so unashamedly on the basis that we’ve got to do this in the safest way possible, and that does mean necessary caution
 So, how can you help Rosina?
 We have a two metre rule in our regulations, we have to consider that, and we’re not about to change the law on that, because I think there’s good evidence actually, that you are safer, you have double the risk having a one metre rule, as opposed to a two metre rule. The Scientific Group on Emergencies, has advised all the governments of the UK on that.
 Okay.
 And I’m not about to risk the lives of our citizens, on the basis of what Rocco suggests.
 So, the conclusion of that is Rosina’s business might go to the wall. Rosina, you’ve got your hand up, let’s hear from you again.
 I’m not saying about reducing the social distancing of two metres, if that’s the law, that’s law. And I think even if you reduced it to one metre, I don’t think that would make a lot of difference, because I think in the mind of the consumer, it’s very much scorched in about the two metre rule, about staying away from other people. I think even if you reduced it to half a metre, I think people are going to stay away. So our dilemma is not just in the next week, or the next two weeks or the next month, I think is a much, much longer longterm problem that the hospitality are going to have.
 Lisa-Marie?
 Hi, sorry, in Wales, more than 95 per cent of our businesses are small and micro businesses, and at the moment, there is zero admissions going into Gwent, and there are really low admissions going into Heath Hospital. So, there’s no evidence really, to suggest keeping a lockdown in place, but also have they already taken into account what impact this is going to have on all these small businesses, and our economy in Wales, which could be severely affected if we keep some of these guidelines in place?
 Shakeel.
 I just wanted to ask, once furlough has ended, should we prepare for mass redundancies for businesses that can no longer function in the new normal?
 And let me hear from John?
 The economy in Wales has always been a House of Cards, we’re very dependant on the public sector. And we should have been leading the way in reopening, but we’re not, we’re forever days, weeks behind, what Westminster’s doing, and really the Welsh Assembly sits on its hands for three weeks, in between thawing out a few little tit bits of very, very minor trivial relaxing.
 Robert, looking at the situation in England, we had the Business Secretary, Alok Sharma, warning that three and a half million jobs are at risk in the hospitality sector. The government’s coming under a lot of pressure from Conservative MPs to do more for businesses like Rosina’s, and in particular reduce this two metre distance, any chance of that happening?
 Clarity is something that people demand from government. And whilst it’s right of us to consider the evidence and to constantly evaluate and question and make adjustments, the two metre rule certainly stays for the foreseeable. I think with regard to the other measures… 
 It’s confusing though isn’t it, given that some countries are going for a metre, the WHO is suggesting a metre, and then you’ve got other countries that are going for one and a half metre, people are wondering, where’s the…it’s all one science, so how is that decision made? 
 I think, Fiona, it’s a question of two stages; the evidence and the advice you get from SAGE and the scientists forms part of a decision making, that is ultimately political, the two stage approach to it. And there will be a number of different factors in that. I think the challenge for government now, as we come out of this period of really intense lockdown, is how to get the combination right. And that’s why there’s been a big debate about the quarantine. Clearly at the time of the height of the outbreak, quarantine would have made no difference, but now, the advice that we get, is that even small adjustments can affect that R rate, and therefore it’s a constant evaluation to see what adjustments we can make, to help people in Rosina’s position, and to get the balance right between the need to open up, but the need to save lives as well.
 Bernadine?
 Yeah, I don’t know, I don’t know what the solution is. So, if the hospitality industry does open up, as you would like Rocco, how do you keep people safe, you know? You can’t open up with social distancing, so how do you keep people safe?
 But I think it’s up to the consumer to decide what he wants to do. I mean people have been terrified by the government propaganda, and in a way that’s gradually breaking down already, you see it with the people on the beaches, you see it with people in the parks. They’re not social distancing and two metres, the only place I’ve seen it happening is here, tonight.
 And we’re doing it very well. But, it’s not just propaganda, Rocco.
 [voices overlap 00:37:57] talking about the economy, it’s not about the economy, it’s about the livelihoods of millions of people. We’re not talking about thousands here, we’re talking about millions of people who are going to lose their jobs, and their families, and it’ll affect their health and everything else. You can’t just sweep it aside, oh it’s just the economy. What about the resorts in Wales, like Rhyl, Llandudno, Porthcawl, which depend entirely on a summer season? Those people are not going to be able to function. They’re not going to survive. They’ve had one winter, they’re going into another winter, and the summer which should have lifted them up, is not going to be there if you carry on like this. So all those businesses are going to be devastated [voices overlap 00:38:46] and all the jobs that go with them.
 But it’s also… It’s not just propaganda, obviously, I think people are confused by the different information that’s coming out, you talked about this report from Stanford 0.1 to 0.2 per cent…
 Yeah, but I mean the German, the German…
 The German, there’s a report by experts in the German government, which was leaked, which says that the German government’s reaction was completely over the top, was unnecessary, they compared it to the 2017 and ’18 influence epidemic, which killed one and a half million people across the world, it killed 25,000 people in Germany, 28,000 in this country, and the economy of the world was not locked down. In ’68, when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong Flu. That killed over a million people worldwide. We had 80,000 in this country. I don’t remember anything about it, it wasn’t talked about.
 And yet we are still at 63,00 excess deaths for this time, and we are the highest country in Europe for deaths? Now one of the things that the public knows, and people should make their own responses, and this is one of the reasons, I think, why people are still keeping to the two metres themselves, Professor Neil Ferguson has said it, we went into lockdown too late, and we went into lockdown too late because Boris Johnson likes to think that he will let people do what they want to do.
 But let me just say, that was not peer reviewed, as I expect you know, and other scientists have come out with different figures in terms of statistics for deaths coming from coronavirus.
 No.
 And he is reluctant to take criticism of this.
 That’s just not right.
 Now, here in Wales, I deeply fear when the furlough scheme is starting to scale down, it starts to scale down in August, when businesses are responsible for taking on their national insurance and their pensions. Seventy four per cent of our business are dependant, are using the furlough scheme. And of course, I represent an area, Dwyfor Meirionnydd, which is deeply dependant on the tourism industry, and I fear what is going to happen with that industry, and I talk to people like the Ffestiniog Railway, an absolute jewel in the crown, the heritage railways in North Wales, absolute jewel in the crown, they are facing what they call, the three winter scenario.
 Well, you mentioned testing Liz, we have a question on that from Shakeel.
 Hi, okay, so we’ve recruited 25,000 contact tracers, however with today’s test and trace results showing that a third of people who are testing positive are not providing any details for those close contacts, is the system good enough, and is it up to scratch?
 Robert, also I’m going to come to you on that, ’cause we’ve had the figures out today, from the Health Secretary, Matt Hancock. Vaughan, let me just start with you. I mean contact traces have been happening in Wales for some period of time, but what we don’t know, I think, is how many people are actually being contacted, and agreeing to handover their contacts, is that right?
 And so it does show we’ve got an effective system here, we’ve delivered that in partnership between our National Health Service and the [authorities that deliver the system 00:43:33]. 
 Do you agree with that Liz?
 Well, we know the fiasco that happened with the testing targets from Wales, where they had to be given up on. We actually had to give up on targets because they were so impossible to reach. And I would go back to the question of the Roche testing contract, when we know that thousands of tests were taken away from Wales, by the UK government, and for some reason or other, I think the people of Wales deserve to hear the full story of this, and yet I understand Vaughan, that you’re not releasing the actual email correspondence, which was the reason as to why we don’t have these tests in Wales.
 Well, there’s some facts to deal with there, if I may? When it comes to test results in Wales, over 90 per cent of the people get their test results within 48 hours. The idea that it’s somehow a widespread problem with late test results, simply doesn’t match the facts. When it comes to our testing capacity, the review that I ordered into where we were, revealed that we couldn’t meet those early aspirations about the number of tests we wanted, because equipment was delayed in other countries, some countries stopped the export of testing equipment.
 Can I just say one thing?
 Briefly, Liz, ’cause I need to get around the panel.
 Contact testing was started in Wales, and stopped almost immediately. The only place where it carried on was Ceredigion, where they’ve had the lowest deaths and the lowest rate, I think 61 amongst 100,000 of infection.
 Okay, let’s come back to Shakeel’s question. 
 incidence in that county as well though Liz, so it isn’t a matter of the contact tracing system determining. And as with every part of the UK, they stopped contact tracing in the early part of the pandemic, because we simply didn’t have the resources to carry on doing that. Now, that is the truth of the matter. I do wish we’d had greater capacity at an earlier point in time, to allow us to make a different choice. But, we made choice with the facts available to us. We’re making choices now, that are all about we keep Wales safe, and we’re actually doing a decent job compared to other parts of the UK.
 Okay, let me drag us back to Shakeel’s question, which is talking about the 25,000 contact tracers in England, with today’s test and trace results showing that a third of the people who tested positive, are not handing over their contacts to then be traced and isolate. Is that good enough?
 Well, I think we can do even more. I mean, let’s remember that that meant that two thirds did the right thing, and of that two thirds, 85 per cent then confirmed that they would self-isolate, that’s nearly 27,000 people who will now have the benefit of this system, so…
 Sure, but what about the third that Shakeel is referring to?
 Well, look, I think he’s right to draw our attention to the fact that they’re still people who are not cooperating. I think it’s…
 And why do you think that is?
 Well, I’m concerned about that. I think it’s all of our collective duty to work with the authorities, to do everything we can to do our part, and clearly we’ve got to get the message over again and again, about the importance of sharing that information, and we share it in a voluntary way, but we do it in a spirit of collective coming together to fight this virus. I think this is only the first week, but I think the figures are encouraging.
 I know, I just mention it simply because, some minutes that came out from SAGE, which of course is the scientific body advising the government, say that 80 per cent of contacts need to be traced, in order for this system to be effective. And if a third of the people aren’t handing over their contacts at all, you’re not going to get anywhere near that are you?
 Yeah, well, we need to do better, as I’ve said, and I think that, in the first week, that is encouraging, but I very much hope and I would expect, that as we all get more used to it, then the new normal will start to apply, and people will see the advantage in sharing that information, and doing the right thing, because cumulatively, as we’ve found with lockdown, we can use this system to continue the fight against the virus.
 Ross?
 Hello, sorry. Do you reckon Rob, do you think there’s a correlation between the confidence in how the government’s dealt with this pandemic and connecting that with the third that doesn’t give any of their details with the Track and Trace?
 I love the fact that Ross is calling you Rob as well, we’re getting fantastically informal here.
 That’s alright Ross, thank you very much, a lot of people do. I think it’s a very important point. I talked about confidence, I think, a little earlier on.
 But, do you think he’s right?
 I think that we’ve got to ask ourselves the question, are people doing it because they don’t want to cooperate, that they value, perhaps their own privacy or…
 Or, loss of trust, that’s what Ross is asking.
 Or are they saying, well, and I’m trying to deal with the point, I think that there is still, actually, from all the evidence that I’m seeing, a high degree of, not so much people just doing it because the government are telling them to do it, people doing it because they know, from their own information and their own research, and their own understanding, that it is the right thing to do, you know? I’ve never underestimated the sense of the Welsh public or the British public, to do the right thing. You will always have a minority, perhaps who won’t, but the majority can be trusted, and frankly, rather than blind trusting government, government should be trusting people to do the right thing, that’s very much my approach.
 Or are they asking, what would Dominic Cummings do?
 Okay.
 Let's not talk about individuals shall we now, Liz, let’s raise the level of the debate shall we
 Let me get round the rest of the panel. Bernadine, what do you make of what you’re hearing?
 I don’t know. I think there is a privacy issue, and I do think there’s a trust issue, actually I kind of agree with Ross, because I certainly haven’t taken my lead from this government, in terms of the pandemic. I went into lockdown some 10 days before the government told me to, because it was glaringly obvious to me that I should do, and I might have saved my life, I don’t know. Because I zap around London on the tube all the time. And the week before I went into lockdown, the tube was heaving, people were coughing and spluttering and sniffing, it was terrible. And I do know people who continued to travel around London, who got the virus, you know? So I did not take my leadership from this government. And we know about Boris and him shaking hands with coronavirus patients in a hospital, when we all knew that you shouldn’t be making physical contact with people.
 He did later say that he was shaking hands with the staff, he made the point that he wasn’t…
 Oh did he?
…yes, he wasn’t shaking hands with the patients.
 Well, the thing is, that’s what he said, that’s what we perceived him to say, so that was his leadership. So, I think people are very suspicious, and I think people are making up their own minds about what they’re going to do, and not necessarily listening to the government. And we have to bring up Cummings, who I’m sure is brought up a lot in this programme, because, you know, he’s…
 Well he certainly was at the time, yes, there was quite a lot of conversation about him.
 Well, yeah, so, you know, look at his leadership skills, you know, although he’s the man behind the throne? He’s the puppet master. But we know what he did, so it’s a very difficult situation. It’s very difficult for people, who do you listen to?
 Testing is one thing, tracking is another one, but it’s the speed of results of the test which is important. I was desperate to get back to work when I was tested, but it took three days for my results to come back. I was desperate, because I knew I was needed in work. But, when you hear stories like, getting your eyes tested, by driving a certain amount of miles, and the lack of leadership. Yes, the majority of people might get their results, but for healthcare workers, I think it’s important that the speed of reporting should be quicker. Not only that, the results and the statistics that we look for, we need to have those results quicker, we need to learn from Korea, where the results come within a day, and then the track and testing process is much faster with isolation. So, we needed to learn much quicker from Korea, and other countries who have dealt with it, rather than wait for lack of leadership, and not condemning what the Prime Minister’s aid did or the other ingredients within the whole recipe of protecting people. I feel much safer with this two metre rule over here, but then the lack of PPE, hearing stories and the report coming out about ethnic minority doctors, why they’re dying more than the others, these are the issues that we need to have clear recommendations, to make sure that we are moving in the right direction. We need to protect every life that we can.
 Of course, not just doctors, we’re talking about all healthcare staff. Rocco?
 Well, it’s very peculiar this virus, and it doesn’t affect everybody in the same way. The week before I emerged with the symptoms, which was actually coincided with lockdown, I worked cheek by jowl with six senior executives in my office, because we were planning for the issues that we had to face, and none of them got the disease. In my household, which has 11 people and two children, and we were all together in it, only four people got the disease. And why didn’t the others catch it? And so, I think a lot of the modelling that’s taking place, is based on assumptions that are completely wrong. 
 It is a new disease, of course?
 Yeah, I know, well yes, but I mean, 500,000 deaths were based on a computer model, completely false assumptions. Probably…
 Well I’m not sure that Neil Ferguson shares that view, but yes.
 …the 25,000 less deaths that we would have had if we’d locked down earlier, the same wrong assumptions have been put into the computer model, why should we believe them?
 But Rocco, forgive me, this illness is not known to science for more than perhaps six months. We cannot say for certain how it will pan out. 
 No, but I mean…
 They’re making the best assessments under the circumstances.
…a lot of the…this whole two metre distance is based principally on the Spanish Flu, the second wave is based on the Spanish Flu, a completely different disease to this. The last two coronaviruses petered out on their own, and this will probably happen with this one.
 Well, that would be marvellous if that were the case, I’m not sure that there is certainty on that, far from it, I think Rocco, but thank you. We are out of time, which is why I’m closing you down on that I’m afraid.