Let's get started. Our first question tonight is from Aneel James.
Has Tory sleaze returned?
Caroline Lucas.
Yes, it has returned, on steroids, I'm afraid. It really has been shocking to see the way in which Owen Paterson has been defended by the Prime Minister that, in a sense, we've abolished any kind of independent system of dealing with MPs' misconduct and instead we have the prospects of a new committee that was going to be a kangaroo court. There was going to be a built-in government majority on the new committee.
You can't go around changing the rules when you don't like them. That's exactly what this prime minister is doing. It goes much wider, sadly, than just Owen Paterson. This is a Prime Minister who cares nothing for standards or dish and the rule of law. We saw him do something and the rule of law. We saw him do something something similar when he a on the ground partly. He refused to sack prettiy a tell when she was accused of bullying. He himself, of course, is the biggest problem of all.
I have tried myself to find out how you hold the prime minister to account whether he lies, repeatedly. Let's be very clear this is a prime minister who lies repeatedly, systematically. The problem is the Judge, jury and courted is all the prime minister. There's no way of holding him to account. This is a bigger problem than Owen Paterson. I'm glad he resigned. It was grotesque to watch Parliament yesterday to see how all thetory MPs were criteria goodness into supporting this amount. I'm not sure what Paul Scully Paul Scully will think of it, but vote for it. It is extraordinary to see how people can be persuaded for something that is so manifestly wrong. So, yes, Tory liaise is back and idle a bad look.
Paul Scully.
It's not. We have a situation here where we have to look at the process. I think if you look at the process that Owen Paterson went through, if that came to me as a constituency MP with someone in a different set of circumstances, when he was talking about the fact that it was 17 months, he had 17 witnesses, none of whom were questioned, I would want to be able to test that. I would want to have maybe a second structure, an appeal system. We also have -- we actually have two processes. We all have an independent complaints and grievance scheme that was set up with other issues around bullying, when the previous speaker was accused of bullying. That has an appeal system. This one doesn't.
Is the government wrong to back down today?
What I was going to say, that's why I voted about the process. It is fair that someone should be able to go through that. It did not overturn what the Commissioner for Standards actually found because they would have had that due process and that would have come back whatever the result was. But, no, then, obviously, Owen Paterson has forced the issue by resigning. I think, clearly there was a case to answer, absolutely there was a case to answer.
Emily Thornberry.
There is an appeal process. Let me touch on that for a minute. What happens is if a complaint has been made against you, let's say you received half a million pounds for two companies to lobby for them, let's say, as happened with this case, and he goes before an independent commissioner, he then can go before a panel of MPs then can go before the whole of Parliament. It is important to stick to the truth. What happened 25 years ago, obviously, was at the end of a long time of tory government conservatory MPs were taking money in brown envelopes to ask questions on behalf of companies, at the end of this long period of a conservative government we havetory MPs taking money again to ask questions and lobby on behalf. At least last time they were ashamed. It is not just conservatives, there have been other MPs, clearly, who have brought Parliament into disrepute and we need to have an independent system that can assess what has happened and make sure proper decisions are made. We cannot have MPs deciding for themselves.
The current process we have is one whereby more than half-of the people on the panel are members of the public. What happened yesterday was the to use that you are majority and sweep away all of that, sweep away all of that do have them make a fundamental change to our constitution and decide they were going to introduce a committee that was going to be dominated by --coronavirus, that was com innate by MPs, not have any members of the chaired by a Conservative so they could do whatever they wanted. That isn't the way we do things in this country. We need to have an independent panel and we have to be very careful that, once all the fuss is gone, they don't try to introduce some skewed system that will allow them to do what they like because they are not above the law. They are not above the law and they should make sure they stick to the rules like everyone else. You cannot, if you are found to have broken the rules, simply decide that you're going to change them. That is not the way you behave in this country.
I think, actually, it is a bit disingenuous to say he didn't have the right of appeal. He was able to take his lawyers in to speak to the committee. He had 17 written witnesses that he could stake --
Written statements you mean.
Written statements that that he could take. They were about character. I read the report yesterday. They were character references. It is like having more witnesses who will say, yes, he might be a burglar but while he was burgling your house he fed the cat. He's a nice man therefore it doesn't count. That's not true. I think the British public are fed up thinking Boris Johnson thinks he can get his mates after. My narrative for this story is that Boris Johnson flew in a private jet down to London, we object to a party, went to meet his friends. Amongst his friends were people there who persuaded him to get him off, to get Owen Paterson off. He said "I'll do this". It might not be the true but that's what it is in the general public's mind. I'm telling you lots of people are saying that. My friends are saying that. We don't understand what happened yesterday. At one point he was saying we should do this, by lunchtime today, everything is thrown up in the air and everything is changed. What's the truth of it? Where are the facts in this?
You mentioned Boris Johnson flying in a private jet. Were you at that dinner?
This is very embarrassing. I was invited but I couldn't get a dog sitter. This is why I'm a terrible journalist. I'm five minutes from where things are happening and I find a reason not to be in the room. The government backed Owen Paterson, then withdrew the report. By doing so it damaged its -- and Owen Paterson. I think the Prime Minister was motivated by a sense of decency. He thought in this instance a man was being unfairly hounded. Not just for the reasons being given because the process was so long, so opaque and somewhat contradictory. Not just because the lobbying he was supposed to have done is raising genuine public health questions with ministers, one was related to absence in --
There is a third reason, which we have not mentioned because it is too sensitive, which is last year Owen Paterson's wife took her own life. That's why many felt sympathetic to support this man in this particular instance.
Now the problem is they weren't just supporting a man with one case, which they might feel on the merits they can take his side on; they were also, in doing that, attempting to rewrite the rules. And that looks like someone has been found guilty of something and you're trying to get them off by rewriting the rules. And by screwing around in the last 48 hours, the government has ended up failing on both counts. It has undermined any case for reform because it looks like reform is a Trojan horse for getting their mate off, but they've also done something which led to an MP having to resign even though he insists he is guilty of nothing. It is a PR disaster. But only a few weeks since the death of David Amoss, a few weeks ago we were talking about the importance of remembering that MPs are human beings. It doesn't mean they should be let off things. Nevertheless, I'm telling you, behind the scenes there is a human context to this story and that's why many MPs felt obliged to support Owen Paterson.
I'm in human resources and we have to deal with issues like this all the time. I find it very difficult when there's a standards piece and someone is convicted in the court, both MPs, one gets hounded, has to leave, the other can still be an MP. Why don't we have the same standard for everything, when you are convicted of something, you have to leave.
Of course Owen Paterson has not been convicted of anything.
I think the MPs should only be dealing with their constituency issues, not taking on multiple roles. By taking on multiple roles it is saying the issues within their constituency is a part-time role. So I therefore have time to take payment from other companies. When you are elected into this particular role for your constituency, you act for them, them alone and nobody else.
Would you include things like being a firefighter or a GP? I think it can be a good thing that MPs can do things other than be an MP.
The idea that you're going to have time to be putting in to doing another job on top of your work as an MP I think is for the birds. I think where you might be right is to have -- where you might be right is we could look at job-sharing for MPs. That is something I think would be positive. You get a wider selection of people putting themselves forward for that role, people who are carers or people who want to keep a foot in the door of being a GP or firefighter, whatever it is. But the idea you can find time for a part-time job that's going to pay you on top of being an MP I find preposterous.
We got a little bit away from the question. Paul, has Tory sleaze returned?
I am listening with interest. I am only privileged to what I read in the newspapers. But what is clear to me, it is an own goal that has been scored here. At a time when we need more trust in our politicians, in any institutions, at a time that we need to operate under a higher moral standard, I can only conclude that this is a human tragedy but also a political tragedy that should have some lessons. You cannot change the game when you are playing the game and that seems to be an attempt here to do that. That is very confusing for the public at large and I consider myself to be part of that public at large. There is a bigger issue here, though, that has been raised which I actually agree with that to what extent do we let other money come into politics to influence the decisions that need to be taken? In my book Net Positive that just came out, I specifically discussed the $3.5 billion that industry is using to lobby to influence laws. I have a problem with that. I think society at large has a problem with that. At Unilever I would not allow any of these things to happen, if I may be very clear.
So for individual companies to pay for very specific tasks to be done is something that I think might have been accepted in the public eye a few years ago but should be looked at now in the world that we live in currently. My advice to companies would be, who actually pay that money, you're as much part of this problem that we're discussing as the people here that are being talked about. A trust items on foot, leaves on horseback. I think in this case the horses were out, and that's regrettable. It would be good to provide laws that were broader to cover this.
I would like to decide when the government decided this process needed review. Was it because of Mr Paterson or is it because the process needs review? Either way, as the gentlemen just said, once you committed something under one set of rules, you shouldn't suddenly change them. Change the rules, by all means, but do that because you need to change them, not because one of your mates has got a problem. [ DONE]
There has been a slow burn on this. You can see a pattern of behaviour in relation to this government, particularly in relation to the Prime Minister. He won't answer questions straightforwardly about how his flat at No. 10 was redecorated, who paid for his holiday in Mustique. There were his junior ministers. We heard about the Home Secretary. Where there are breaches on the face of it on the rules, nothing seems to happen.
There's a falling out between the government and those who are supposed to be independently applying those rules. What is most important is the way they are going to try to undermine judicial review, where the courts can hold government to account. Our democratic system has a series of checks and balances but at the moment we have a government to whom they feel the law doesn't apply to them. It is a pattern of behaviour.
To ask the question put by the man in the sweater there, why decide to change the process, now you aren't able to or the government has changed it's mind. This has been in existence since 2013.
I was going to answer that directly. The system has not carried a lot of confidence with it, by complainants and those going through the system itself. But there were issues particularly highlighted by this case. So, rather than changing the system drastically, rather than seeking to overturn the decision as some have talked about, it was looking to add an extra layer of appeal to be able to sort of test the --
Why now? The question is why now?
Because of what we've seen. When politicians go through these processes they have a massive height to fall from. We've seen what's happened with the human cost, as Tim said, of Owen, who broke his back. He was lucky to be able to walk again. Then went through this process, then lost his wife.
The perspective that is looked on in politicians, I don't think, actually, is often worked through at what cost they're doing some parts of their job. But, clearly, there was a case to be answered. That's what I'm saying. It wasn't going to overturn the decision but it was going to analyse it further.
There may be an argument to say look again at this process. But the idea that you would do that under a live case is just -- it is just unacceptable. I sat on the committee that Andrew Ledson chaired looking at the issue of sexual harassment in Parliament and what processes you would need for that. It took us a year of painstaking cross-party work to come up with a new system, a better system. That's the kind of legwork that you had to put in. The idea that Jacob Reese Mogg could rock up in Parliament yesterday and say here's a new committee when putting the tories in the driving seat was never going to work. We need the long-term process to get the better rules in place. The last thing I wanted to say to Tim was about this being a case of Boris Johnson showing decency, there is a case that Boris Johnson was thinking about his own skin because he knows the commissioner is likely to be looking at him again, about his flat. So he's actually got bad blood with this committee. For him to be promoting a process that would say she will be pushed out of her role in order for him to be able to carry on with his lackadaisical business as usual --
If you throw these around it is damaging politics as a whole. Absolutely it is. Time and time again, when people will obviously use this for party political points --
The audience are laughing when you say that. What do you feel about that?
The lady at the back is talking about the narrative. That's the narrative given by the other parties, by the media who are looking at the short-term aspects.
It is not what you want us to hear. This is your story as well, isn't it? This man needs to be let off.
No, absolutely not. It wasn't going to overturn the decision --
If it is not going to overturn the decision, let it run through.
It was taking a long-term view of his career and that process to give confidence in the process long term.
Forgive me for interrupting. I'm going to move on because there's a massive topic I want to cover this evening. Before I get to it, I want to say next week we will be in Hartlepool as COP-26 comes to a close. We will have Naomi Klein, then the following week we are in Beckenham where we will be joined by Jordan Peterson. If you would like to be in either of those audiences, do apply on the Question Time website. Do come along, we'd love to see you there.
Our next question from Jonathan.
Without the likes of Russia, India and China on board, are this week's COP-26 breakthrough pledges such as the reduction of methane emissions a glimmer of hope or more blah blah blah?
To quote the words of Greta Thunberg. Paul, not only have you been the head of Unilever for 10 years but you work with the UN as an advocate for sustainability. What's your view on this?
I'm glad we're talking climate change now and I'm in Glasgow and not London because the issues in London seem to be more trivial than what we're dealing with here in Glasgow. People have discovered the burning issue of climate change and we don't have any time any more. The question is a pertinent one. We need the bigger countries like India, China, Russia, 100 percent on board. But the situation is actually a little bit better than the question would suggest. Before COVID started, we have all worried that nobody was serious to stick to the Paris Agreements, to get to the 1.5 degrees. When COVID came everybody said that's a major distraction, we will not spend time on climate change.
At the time of COVID, 20 percent of the world had agreed to be net 0 by 2050. We now have 80 percent of the world. China, India, Russia have signed up to the 1.5 degree pledge. They are participating in the 100 million financing for emerging markets. They have signed major declarations on forest reduction and forest restoration. So all these --
Paul, I'm sorry to interrupt. Let me ask you about deforestation. You have 110 countries agreeing to reverse it by 2030, then today, Indonesia, who had signed up to that, said hang on a minute, we don't want to be doing that after all. That must be disheartening, to say the least.
India has made a commitment to be net zero by 2070 and on carbon emission by 2050. Russia has made a commitment with China to be net zero by 2060. These countries are there. They have made commitments and there are mechanics that increasingly are put in place to hold everybody accountable. This is the next step that needs to happen. So we can all speculate on the future of whether or not these countries are doing but, as I said, they are the most affected by climate change. They have the most interest to ensure the right actions will be implemented.
Coming to independent -- the only country with tropical forests, has seen a rapid decline in deforestation. They are continuing with that. They put a price of carbon in place. They have aggressive government policies to continue in that direction because they know the world doesn't want unsustainable palm oil anymore. They know they are destroying livelihoods of indigenous people if they continue like this. So the country is actively involved in preserving our natural capital. In fact, Indonesia is probably best placed in the future in this world to monetise the enormous natural capital that they have to confer their economy to this greener more sustainable economy.
I'm sorry, Paul, forgive me. I'm going to bring in the rest of the panel. The question is, given that Russia, India and China didn't turn up, how successful are the breakthrough pledges of COP-26, a glimmer of hope or blah blah blah.
The leaders didn't have support but I'm feeling positive about COP, actually. What it has done is come up with deadlines and goals, but the thing is they push the world in a certain direction. Once, most catalytically, we begin to invest private capital in the technology, that will develop momentum.
Just because a -- because it's target isn't ambitious or it is a long way off. It does matter, of course, it would be better if it were sooner, but because they set the target they are going to develop towards it. We run into two problems. One is that the developing world is not going to wish to give up growth that the developed world has enjoyed. So we have to find some way of handling that. An example is the disappointing statement by Indonesia on deforestation, where it said it would be unfair to expect us to keep to these limits. When rich countries have developed so fast, why should they limit themselves? So it may be the West has to spend more money to assist those countries to go to net zero. The second problem we come up against is internal. It is to do the cost of us at home of going green. It was notable that Joe Biden is trying to persuade OPEC to increase production of oil. That's not a good look. There is currently a gulf, a gap between our ambition of where we want to be in Britain and where the technology is. It's not there yet. It has not been developed, it is not quite cheap enough. How do we meet that gap between our ambition and where the technology is?
The reality, I expect, is it a reduction in individual consumption and spending a lot more money through taxes, subsidies, increased prices, etcetera, etcetera. So I'm waiting for the moment when western governments are a little bit more honest with their public and say to them: If you really want to do this, we can do it, we're making progress, but it is going to cost the consumer a lot of money and it is going to require a change in lifestyle. When you put that proposition to the public, you might see some consumer resistance.
The man there.
Good evening. The cost to the consumer, the general public, but what about the actual politicians that are attending this conference? They're flying from all over the world. The American President landed on Air Force One. He had many limousines to take him to the actual conference. How is that helping climate change?
It doesn't and it's disgusting and the conference should have been as virtual as possible. This is my point. Politicians are going to ask us to make significant sacrifices in the next few years. If they are still flying to a climate conference -- by the way, in the middle of a pandemic -- that looks absolutely appalling. I guess that fish gotta swim and the rich got to fly, but if they are trying to persuade us, ordinary people, to adjust our lifestyles to meet their ambitions, it is about time they started to do it as well.
The man at the back there.
With all the restrictions in 2020 that were put on us by the pandemic, carbon emissions globally fell by 5 percent. Are we kidding ourselves about the seismic sense that's needed to really reduce carbon levels down?
We would have to go into some kind of lockdown, is what you are saying? Caroline, I don't know what your view is about that. You are hearing some optimistic views, are you?
I think there has been incremental steps forward. In terms of trying to measure whether or not you feel optimistic, it feels there are two ways of measuring that. On the one hand the world of what's deemed to be currently politically possible, and in that world with, yes, the small steps forward are welcome, although there are big questions about how the deforestation agreement will be enforced, the fact that on the finance agreement it is still not clear whether or not companies are still going to be able to fund fossil fuels, it looks as if they are, so there are issues there. But compared to the transformative change that it requires, and let's not forget what is at stake here, the future of small island states and the rest of us, too, then compared to that kind of way of measuring progress we are still a long way off.
I want to challenge some of the language around the sacrifice. I think one of the most frustrating things about this discussion is the fact that what's possible here is the possibility of a better quality of life for all of us. It doesn't have to be around sack cloth and ashes. This is about the possibility, for example, of having every single home properly insulated. A proper house by house, street by street locally authority led programme that gets fuel bills down, creates millions of jobs. One of my favourite cartoons has a professor in front of a whiteboard. On the whiteboard they listed all the advantages of moving to a zero carbon economy, free or affordable public transport, properly insulated homes. Then there's a student with a speech bubble coming out of their mouths: What if climate change is a hoax and we created a better world for no reason. There's a real change of creating that better world, and realised that public opinion is miles ahead of government. They want bolder action, looks at every single opinion poll where it is clear that people want to act. Look at the fact that climate change be acceptable -- come up with far bolder things that governments ever do. For those people taking many, many flights, just 15 percent of the population take 70 percent of the flights. Once you start taking more than one flight in a year that ratchets up. People like there -- they want to see a ban on high carbon products being advertised. There are some win wins here. We should be able to talk about those and bringing people with us.
Let's hear from some of these people.
Personal responsibility is important. Where's the emphasis being placed on corporate responsibility who create the most emissions.
I'll come back to that. Yes, the Woman in the yellow top.
Is given that China and Russia are not admonishing seize how significant is that in those countries for creating change.
One of the issues I have is the politicians are making these pledges, they're not backed by anything, they are just weak promises. The problem we have is lot of the leaders are using this as a photo opportunity. The chancellor brings forward a green budget box. A few weeks ago in his budget box, which was a different colour, he was cutting the tax that people pay for domestic flight. Domestic flights is the worst possible way that you can move around. It doesn't join up with the pledges they are making now.
COP is not a moment in time. It is a long time getting to this culmination. When we took over the presidency there was 20 or 30 percent -- 20 countries, rather, that had adopted a net zero plan. They are now up to 90. We are starting to build up that crescendo. We know that Paris was a time to set those targets but now is the time where we are starting to outline what action is going to be taken.
I agree that it's, you know, again the optics of people flying into Glasgow is not particularly good, but what you do find --
And the prime minister flying in a private jet to a dinner in London.
What you find is not so much what's happening in that hall, it's what's happening with the negotiating teams alongside those informal meetings. When China are not here, for example, there is a high-level negotiating team from China that's over here.
So do you think -- the question, basically, is it going to be a success or more blah blah blah? I know we are only part way through it, at the moment is it looking a success.
I'm optimistic. There's plenty more to be done, clearly. The prime minister is talking about coal, cars, cash and trees. All those need to be looked at. Whether it is deforestation, whether making sure we have 450 of the top financial companies in the world that are aligning their funds, trillions of pounds, dollars worth of funds along with the climate change, the US climate change targets. So this is a really important market change. But what it is also doing is developing and creating markets. Tim talked about the cost to the consumer, but the government money and the government strategies that we have also leveraged private money. So the hydrogen strategy is bringing in money to this country because they know the government are backing a particular technology and that can start to be developed.
I think in order to assist whether COP is going to be a success, we need to look at other commitments that the countries are making enough and will they stick to them. As the gentleman in the blue jacket was saying, I agree with you. I do worry that sometimes -- well, we saw it, we saw it, frankly -- I went to the Copenhagen summit. There was £100 billion supposed to be committed by the developed world to the developing world to help them develop in a green way and be able to protect themselves against the effects of climate change. They haven't seen that money. So I worry there are countries going we'll be zero by 2070. There isn't a plan -- a proper plan as to how they are going to get there. And it doesn't really -- I mean, it is great now people are starting to say we want to get to net zero. That's different to what they said before. They were saying before they didn't need to do it. But we need a proper plan showing how we're going to get there, how much carbon are they going to produce in the meantime. Because the truth is, in order to stick to make sure our planet doesn't heat up more than 1.5 degrees we need to half the amount of carbon we are producing by the end of this decade. Now, how are we going to do that?
Yes, we need to have proper commitments from countries where they mean it and whenever we have international meetings we sit down and say how is your plan? How are you getting on with it and people are held to account. Yes, we need to spread responsibility to other companies. It may be that British companies in Britain or perhaps Dutch companies, you know, when they are working in places where there's a lot of regulation, where there's a good media, they may be behaving in a way that they can hold their heads up high, but some of those companies are behaving well once they get out of Europe, away from the media, where there are governments that can't or don't regulate or whatever it is, and those companies in those countries are behaving in a blatantly irresponsible way. What we need to do is be looking carefully at our supply chains, regulate them properly, have a proper vision so we can keep control over the way some companies are behaving around the world.
Paul Polman, let me come back to you. You're not head of Unilever anymore but I know you talked a lot about corporate responsibility. What is your view about some companies not living up to it?
I agree. We are all in this together. The secretary general called It Code Red. We have to all have a long discussion if these commitments are serious or not, but we agreed on a review of that now every two years, the emerging markets are asking for an annual review. I happen to agree with that.
There are clear dates being put in place to see if we can hold people accountable to their commitments. If we don't do that, we have a serious problem. But the issue is this, even with the current commitments, we are far removed from what we really need to stay below 1.5 degrees. We need 20 times more on electric cars. We're talking here about the biggest transformation of our global economy since the Industrial Revolution, which started here in Glasgow, by the way. Now, coming to the cost. I think for the first time people are starting to realise that the cost of not accounting now is infinitely higher than the cost of acting. COVID has shown us that we can't have healthy people on an unhealthy planet. We have spent 60 trillion to save livelihoods. The IMS estimates we lost $27 trillion in the global economy. Guest what, most of that cost is borne by the people that already kept the wrong stick of society in loading their jobs, losing their lives, in not having a safety net around them. So governments are starting to understand and businesses are starting to understand this is probably the biggest and best business opportunity that we have in front of us.
What we see now for a chance is we have enough responsible actions coming up that are making net zero pledges, are starting to implement it and, in fact, are the ones pushing the government now to the higher ambitions that we absolutely need. Ultimately, the proof of the pudding is in the eating but many people will be watching. This is not something that are empty words anymore. It's too late for that. I have children, I have grandchildren. That's why I'm here.
We have another question related to this subject. Let's hear it from Martin.
How can people afford to be able to change to heat pump systems and electric cars, given the cost of these things?
This comes right to the heart of what you were talking about, Tim, and Caroline. Paul Scully, let's start with you. How can people afford to do this?
Let's take the heat pumps, £5,000 subsidy grant towards putting them in but you don't have to put them in now. As Emily described it, it is a glide path to 2050. It is when you are replacing your boiler. That's what I meant about driving markets.
I'm sorry, just sticking to heat pumps, that was the question. The cost is 7 to 10,000 pounds. The subsidy from the government is 5,000 pounds. Is that enough for you, Martin --
I'm not asking him to put it in tomorrow. Similar power has gone down 89 percent. You start a market, show businesses that government are backing this kind of technology, businesses have the confidence for the next 10, 20, years they can pile in, invest money.
The net zero strategy that we launched two weeks ago is looking at seeking to leverage £90 billion worth of private money into developing all these kind of technologies and creating new markets which, incidentally, will create jobs and there's a business opportunity there. So that's when you get that perfect landing point, when you can actually -- instead of the kind of businesses that Emily was talking about exploiting people, can exploit things for the common good.
How can people afford these? That's the question.
I think it is a limp response. It is inadequate. Of course people need to be able to change. Most of us heat our homes through gas but also most of us don't have sufficient insulation. So it is all very well getting a heat pump, but if all the heat is going out the window anyway, we need to have both. Make sure homes are properly insulated, make sure we change the way in which we heat our homes. Quite frankly, I think it is a huge shame that over the last 10, 20 years there has been a change in policy, when I was in the department for energy and climate change, we had a policy of trying to make sure we insulated homes up and down the country. The government cut that scheme, introduced another one which has, frankly, been pathetic.
We had a million homes built in the last few years that haven't been properly insulated. They will need to be retro fitted. So we need to be putting much more into heat pumps, of course we do, to make sure people can have them. We need to regulate new homes to make sure they are built properly, we need to put the money into insulation. It is not sexy talking about insulating your loft, but that is the sort of things people need to do. How will anybody, even if they can afford an electric car, what's the point if you can't charge it? People don't want to go halfway up a motorway and run out of electricity. It doesn't work. They are not putting the money into the infrastructure. They are all talk and not doing it sufficiently seriously.
The woman at the back.
A lot of this comes to the cost of the person. Being in Eastleigh we're close to an airport and a station which have fantastic ability to get anywhere. But if I wanted to go to Edinburgh, I can't get there for £30 on a flight. If I used the train it would be well over £100. I want to drive to be green, but that choice is taken away from me. The same is I would love to have an electric car but I live in a terraced house.
A friend of mine has an electric car and suffers very regularly with juice anxiety.
Juice anxiety?
Juice anxiety. It's a thing.
It is not getting any better, saying it twice.
He drives around and I have had a late night call saying "Can I come to your house and charge my car on the plug because I may not be able to get back home". The charging units are out of order. There might be somebody in the unit charging their car, having a coffee, and he is waiting. So I don't think in this area there is enough chargers. I would love an electric car, but I don't want to suffer right now with juice anxiety.
Tim.
Especially if you had to take someone to hospital or in an emergency go a long distance. This comes back to my point about the gap between ambitions and where we are, the affordability. If we all tomorrow ran out and bought an electric car, which we couldn't afford to do, how would we charge them? We'd run it off the grid. If we all switched from petrol to electrification, where is that going to come from? So the infrastructure also has to catch up in order to match our ambitions.
I'm not saying it can't be done because the point is in the long run, as has been said, you build a market for something so eventually, in theory, green technology could end up guaranteeing us not just abundant energy but also cheaper energy that's cleaner, cheaper than fossil fuels because it is on tap and it's renewable. So in the long run it will be great. But in the short term there is a cost. And it is to be borne by the consumer. I would remind people over the summer, before we even put our heating on, many people's -- my electric bill almost doubled. That's the cost that's going to be put on to the consumers. How do we bridge that gap? Here's an idea, let's ban private jets.
I agree with Tim. I don't agree with much more that Tim said in the sense that there are political choices about where you put the cost for this transition. Clearly, you do not put that cost on people who are unable to pay it. So when you go back to the discussion about the insulating your home or putting the heat pumps in your home, what the government should have put in the strategy was government money. Governments borrow pretty cheaply right now and it needs to invest in order to reap rewards afterwards.
Someone mentioned COVID. If you look at how much the government has spent paying people to be on furlough, that's about 100 billion a year. That has put the economy on ice but it hasn't achieved anything very positive beyond making sure that people could keep going. If we put that money, that kind of money into the transition to a green economy, it would create many, many jobs. It would begin to pay for itself as those jobs raise the taxes that go back to the Treasury. We can do this. I think what is so frustrating, look at some of the countries in Europe who are already working out mass transit, public transport schemes, we should have a vision that isn't looking at petrol cars and thinking how do we replace all of those with electric cars because the building of cars is energy-intensive. We need more manualisation among public transport schemes. The person at the back was saying she would love to use the train but it is more expensive than flying. That is a policy choice the government made. It could make a different choice. It could tax the fuel domestically and make transport more affordable. We know how to do this stuff. What we need to do is a prime minister who isn't giving the green light to a coal mine, isn't planning £27 billion on the biggest road ever, but is serious about investing in the economy.
Paul.
I agree with most of this. In 2014, the International Energy Agency was saying the electric vehicles would be at the same cost as the combustion engine by 2050. We're getting to that in 2024/25. 60 percent of the energy can now be done green at a cheaper cost than the fossil fuel if we just put the right policies in place. In the world we still have 500 billion against fossil fuel. Many governments have put more money to the fossil economy than to the green economy. It doesn't have to cost more money. That is just a fallacy. By the way, when we invented the light bulb, it didn't work right away either. When we invented the computer, it didn't last more than one minute, you had to recharge them. We are well beyond that. Coming to the people itself, everything we do is not because of climate change, it is to ensure that everybody can have a decent life. We're doing this for inclusion. We're doing this for climate justice, equity and respect. So when we put a policy in place, like carbon pricing, which is absolutely needed, we should put the money we get from carbon pricing and be sure that the people who haven't seen their income move up in the last 3 or 4 decades don't have to pay a penny more but are better off so we don't have the yellow jackets in the street.
If the government look at it holistically, 90 or 100 percent of these can be solved. It is the same for business. We should stop competing with each other on the future of humanity, include in politics, and start working together like adults on these things for the benefit of mankind. We have the technology. We know what we have to do, and we don't have time.
Paul, thank you. I'm going to move on. We could talk about climate change all evening, it is a massive topic, hugely important. There's another question a lot of you submitted this evening. I'm just picking one of them.
Can a racist term ever be defined as banter?
What you are talking about here is the furore there's been over Azeem Rafiq who claims he was subjected to institutional racism at his club, and he clearly feels that this has not been handled properly and Yorkshire has carried out its own investigation, ruled no disciplinary action would take place, called it banter. Tim.
The answer is no. There's nothing else to say. I don't see how the club can explain its decision to not take further action other than, I suppose, hypothetically, perhaps, there was a reluctance to do something that might damage the career of a star player. I don't know. But that's purely speculative. No, that particular term is totally unacceptable.
I'm going to explain what the term is. I don't need to cause offence. It is the P word, spelled P-A-K-I. He found it hugely offensive.
It is hugely offensive. It was always hugely offensive. Sometimes when people use the banter defence, they mean "I saw it used on a 70s sitcom". People use it all the time. I haven't caught up and I didn't know. Actually, all that sort of language was considered offensive to tell the truth because it was offensive because it is derogatory. There's no possible explanation for it. I'm not astonished the language is being used, I'm astonished such an august institution like that, critical to English sport, would behave in such a way. The answer to your question is no. Never.
I don't think I have a great deal more to add apart from this, which is British kids whose heritage is from the -- south Asia, are very often really, really keen on cricket. You see loads of kids of Asian heritage playing cricket. For a cricket club that is hoping to be, you know, as good as it possibly can be, to alienate huge amounts of talent like that because of racism is alienating those youngsters who should be embraced by the club, just because that's the right thing to do, but also the club is doing a grave injustice because they are not getting these talented kids. To override talent by racism is never going to help anyone.
Paul Scully, looking at this in the light of day, the findings have yet to be revealed in full, it does seem baffling. What do you think is going on here?
I couldn't tell you. I'm someone of south Asian heritage, my father was Belize. I'm peal skinned, I had those words thrown at me at school.
How --
I shrugged it off as banter. It was someone there. I'm not saying it as someone who had it as bad --
Did you think it was banter at the time?
As I was getting older, I sensed it more. What you find is that it was always wrong. It's thrown around -- I mean, to suit people of dark coloured skin, in the 70s, for example, a Bangladeshi being called that name. They had just gone through a civil war. And, you know, with the -- these other countries. Dividing it in that way is terrible. Coming forward now, no, it is absolutely not right. It cannot be called banter, it must be called out and we must do more to be sure it is being called out.
I'm glad action is being taken. One of the people is not going to be selected. But we need to do more.
Paul Polman, you don't live here, but I'm thinking in terms of your role as head of Unilever, a massive multi-national company, this must be an issue you have also dealt with.
You don't need to live in the UK or anywhere, this is a global issue. My daughter-in-law who lives in the UK is from Singapore and she has to deal with this every week. She is a lawyer in London and it is totally intolerable. She deals with it but there is an underlying issue that goes much deeper that I think is in every culture coming up where hate is being spread, where social media doesn't work in our favour, and we have to fight that. If we stay silent, we become complicit.
In the US we have been very strong in rallying the CEO's together to rally when democracy was undermined on 6 January, when a President makes racial remarks, or whether there are remarks against communities. If we don't speak up against people that have these type of opinions that undermine the basic values of humanity, we move the boundaries in a very dangerous way. If you are a CEO of a company or in any position of power, society actually expects you to speak up. And this is difficult for some people. They tend to take the safe route or the easy way out or to keep silent. That's not acceptable, in my opinion, when it gets to these fundamental issues of dignity and respect, equity, compassion, that really are at the roots of making humanity function.
Caroline.
Paul put it absolutely beautifully. I have little to add. I think the issue of complicity is an important one. Sometimes you think what difference can I make when this is going on and standing up and speaking out and speaking truth and not being complicit is something we can all do, whether it is something we are overhearing on a train or if it is happening in a sports place or anywhere else. So I think there is a responsibility on all of us. I do find the way the Yorkshire cricket club handled this -- the way it dismissed it as not a big deal. I want to give a shout-out to the campaign Hope Not Hate that is standing up for this, running a campaign right now about getting racism out of sport, out of British life altogether.