Our first question tonight is from Sam Winter.
Should we just abandon trips abroad?
Should we abandon trips abroad? Are you planning to go abroad, Sam?
No, personally I'm not. I'm quite happy being in our country. I've arranged a holiday but obviously local. No, this year I don't think I will personally go abroad. Maybe next year. I'd just like to see how things pan out for the rest of this year.
Okay. We should be banning trips abroad according to Labour, Nick.
Well, I don't think we ned to completely abandon the hope of trips abroad a little later in the year. But I do think that the government does need to pause and think again with regard to the loosening of international travel, and let me just explain why that is. Firstly, I think we have a record of failure with COVID protections at the border. Slow in the first place to formal quarantining, slow to mandatory testing, slow to hotel quarantining, and slow to put India on the red list. Now we have a situation where we have the traffic lights, the green, the amber, the red. We've seen chaos in our airports where passengers coming from any of the three categories and mixing together, sometimes it seems hours on end. Secondly, we have this mixed messaging on the amber list.
We have one government minister saying you can go and visit friends and family. Another one saying that it's only essential travel. Another said that we should regard holidays as essential travel. So that has been a complete and utter mess. Now, the government should think again, what should they actually do? What I say the government should do is abandon the amber list. The amber list becomes part of the red list, if you like. You have that hotel quarantining across the board on the amber countries and the existing red countries, then you can move to that limited green list. There's only 12 countries on it at the moment, a number of which are not accepting tourists in any event. But we have to take a more cautious approach now and learn the lessons, the mistakes at the border over the past 12 months.
So, Nadhim, the amber list. There has been different messages, haven't there, from different government ministers? The government's now saying, the amber list, you cannot go to those countries unless it's an emergency of some kind. So shouldn't it just be the red list?
Well, so, the Prime Minister, Secretary of State for Transport, the Health Secretary, the government's advice online all make very clear that all countries are on the amber list, but if those countries have very high levels of infection or a variant of concern then they are on the red list; 43 countries are on the red list…
Do you accept that it's been confusing?
Look, as Sam said, this is not a normal year. This is not a year where people have… Thank you, Sam, for taking a staycation. Hence why we have to be really careful. The green list of countries, a limited number of countries like Israel and Portugal people can travel to, but actually the amber list is a list of countries where you should only travel if it's essential. The problem with the Labour position is Nick's position – and he's the Shadow Home Secretary – is one, his minister in the Home Office, , has a different position on this.
No, he doesn't.
Yes, he does, because he wanted to basically pause all travel from anywhere…
No.
…and then you had a different position…
No, no, no [voices overlap 0:05:00].
…and tonight it's a third position for Labour.
No, it's not.
The reality is this is really, really difficult. This year is not a normal year, and people should look at both the Foreign Office advice on travel, but also those countries, whether it be the green list countries and their advice…because we are all having to deal with this pandemic throughout the whole world.
Okay.
With respect, Nadhim, that is not correct. Our position is to pause the loosening of international travel and think again. And there is not an inconsistent position on that, apart from the Prime Minister…
How long would you pause it for, Nick?
To be frank, in terms of getting the green list into place I think it needs a very short period indeed to get those 12 countries onto the green list. They will be then reviewed on a three weekly period. We know there is another checkpoint on 28 June. What the government needs to do urgently…so we're not talking about waiting, we're talking about urgently, sort out the mess at the airports that we can all see happening and support the airports to be able to separate those passengers in a safe way. Secondly, put the amber list onto the red list, you can then move very quickly to that green list, but you must [voices overlap 0:06:06].
Okay, let's…
Nick, you're all over the place on this. Airports are doing that work. We're talking to them. The Secretary of State for Transport today talked about us working with the airports to see how we use terminals to make sure that people who are coming through, residents and nationals…
Yes, but, if…
…who have to come back from a red list go into hotel quarantine.
Hang on. Let's hear what our audience has got to say.
But you can't…
…Nadhim, sorry. But let's…
This is sort of captain hindsight 2.0. The mixed metaphors.
Okay, let's hear…
No, I must come back on that. No. Hang on. We…
No, Nick, let me just hear what the audience has to say or else it'll just be a conversation, riveting though many may find it, between the pair of you. Carlos.
On the captain hindsight…
Can I come back?
…and the we are where we are expression. I mean, from the beginning of the pandemic the public and the media, we've been complaining about messages that are unclear and push us forward way too fast, and then we have to take a few steps back, which is a lot more painful. And people have been commenting about this to the government from the beginning.
Okay. Jack.
I'm a tour guide, I run a tour company, so I'm desperate to see people come back to the UK. But surely this mixed messaging is only making it harder for people to book holidays, harder for people to see their family if their family are abroad, and harder for people to really have confidence in rebuilding of the economy because they don't know whether there's going to be another health scare.
Dale.
It's common sense that we close the borders until we know about the Indian variant and how that's going to pan out, because it's only going to get worse, and then there's going to be another lockdown and we're just going to be in this whole cycle all over again. So in the first lockdown everything should have been closed, the borders should have been closed, no flights coming in, no going out, until we know exactly what we're dealing with. Because at the moment with the Indian variant we haven't actually got a clue.
Okay. Harriet, let me come to you as former head of Thomas Cook. Should we be abandoning trips abroad for the next few weeks or for the summer?
I think you can hear by the exchange, and I think the frustration and the confusion and the sense of we can, we can't really I think causes more harm than good. So I think, as we just heard, the exchange frustrates us all. If I was the head of a travel company I would be very frustrated in terms of you have regulations, you have a change of traffic light system, you engage with certain vacations and certain approaches. So I think there is real frustration. I do think when we come on to talk about why caution is required and what is really happening in the world and in other parts of the world that we can learn from that some of what Carlos and Dale and Sam have said is worth listening to. But it is so frustrating right now.
But should we be abandoning trips abroad? That's the question.
I think we have to look very carefully over the next couple of weeks at what is happening, because there are countries that have done a tremendous job around the world who in the last couple of weeks have been forced back into a lockdown situation because of the virus being transmitted through people who are vaccinated, because…and I…
You're talking about Singapore. But I'm still not clear, do you think we should be travelling abroad now or not?
I think those countries where all of the requirements have been met, I think people should be allowed to travel abroad, yes.
Okay. All right. Devi.
Yeah. I think what we have to remember is that most countries in the world have border restrictions. This is a debate happening across the world. And actually if I look at South Korea, they said don't go abroad from March 2020. If I want to travel to India today I cannot, they will not let me in because I am not a national of that country. So I think right now Britain is in a great position, and full credit to Minister Zahawi for the vaccine programme, but why would we endanger that by actually having open movement of individuals in and out when we still have a lot of people unvaccinated, we still have a new variant that we don't fully understand in terms of immune protection, and so I think right now we should be cautious and tell people stay at home. Also, I'm from Miami. I miss the sunshine, I miss the blue skies. I haven't seen my family in a year and a half. But we are in an emergency situation. There is massive unemployment, there are more kids that have been out of school and disadvantaged. There are real problems, and I'm willing to say actually I'd rather focus on those as a society than put aside and say I will see my family, and until then it's WhatsApp and Facetime.
Right. Just to ask, who here has booked a holiday abroad this summer? Richard, where are you intending to go, if you're allowed?
Well, this sounds very confusing for a guy from Iceland to say, but I'm going to Greenland.
Right. Okay. So you don't think we should be abandoning trips abroad then. Clearly not.
Well, in answer to Sam's question, I don't actually know, to be honest, I'm a bit confused. Either we're trusted to make our own decisions or we're not, and if we're not it should be red or green, legal or not legal. I think what we need to do…
So you think having the amber light is confusing.
Yes. I think we're either trusted to make our own decisions or we're not. So I think we need to beef up the personnel at the borders, and there's been some fairly concerning scenes from airports in the newspapers this week of people from red and green countries mixing. But ultimately I think we need to weigh up the cost of the negligible risk of someone who is double vaccinated following all the protocol with tests either side against the vast impact to people like Jack.
One in ten people are employed in travel and tourism in this business and in this country and it's their livelihoods that's at stake, and indeed the wider economy. I think we wiped off something like £150 billion last year off our economy because of the shut down in travel. And finally, the wellness and mental health of that well-earned holiday in the sun, albeit not in Greenland, a week abroad, which is something to aspire to. I'd just like to end by saying that I think ultimately it's a bit irrelevant anyway because we cannot hermetically seal our borders. Whilst people in and out of airports has dropped 95 per cent, actually there's 10,000 trucks a day coming over our land borders to pay for things like the clothes we wear, the food we eat, and indeed all the vaccines that we're getting jabbed with, or some of them. So I think we kind of need to face reality here and understand that we cannot make ourselves completely COVID secure and safe for everyone and just seal up the country.
Devi, you wanted to come back in there.
Yeah. I mean, I don't think anyone's saying seal off the country. I'm saying that the system we have right now, the red, amber, green list, isn't working. You're having red and green list passengers mixing at airport terminals, and obviously the Indian variant has spread which shows that the system doesn't work. But there are other systems. The United States and the EU are opening to people who are fully vaccinated and if they have a negative PCR test, and, as you say, that's much lower risk because you're unlikely to pass it on. It happens, but it's a much smaller risk. So I think we should be transitioning to that system rather than on this red, amber, green, which is just confusing, and if that means we need to wait a few more months, we'll have everyone done by mid-July, at least one dose, accelerating hopefully by August, so by October there's a real chance to open up with vaccine passports across the world, which is what we'd done with yellow fever, and I think this is the way the world is going. So in a way it's just patience now for a few more weeks and then that holiday will come.
Well, the challenge was put to me about captain hindsight, but I called back in January for a comprehensive hotel quarantine. I put it to a vote of parliament on 1 February. The Tory MPs failed to support it. I called out the issue of the failure to put India onto the red list for 14 days after Pakistan and Bangladesh had already been added. But I do say to Nadhim today, we can of course debate across this studio about this, but I say it because you need to get this right. The biggest threat to getting our freedoms back is a variant coming from overseas threatening the efficacy of the vaccine rollout that I know you're working on. That's why you have to get this right and rethink this traffic light system.
We've got a question on this. Collette, would you like to put your question?
Thank you, Fiona. Hello panel. Did the government fail by not closing borders to India when they had the chance?
Nadhim.
Collette, so we put India on the red list on 23 April, a full six days before the scientists, the virologists actually said that the B1617.2 variant is a variant under investigation, and a full two weeks before it became a variant of concern. If you are travelling from a red list country you have to go into hotel quarantine, you have to do three tests, a pre-departure test, a test after two days, test after eight days. If you are travelling from an amber country you have to do three tests pre-departure, two and eight, and quarantine for ten days as well.
No, hang on, we're talking about India specifically.
Yes, and…
Just to understand this. On 3 April when Bangladesh and Pakistan were placed on the red list their seven day daily case averages were 33 per million and 21 per million respectively. India's was 53 per million, so why were they not put on the red list then?
So I was about to complete the answer to say that we can only act on the evidence that we have.
But that's pretty good evidence, isn't it?
The evidence of people… Well, let me just address that, Fiona, for a second. The evidence for people coming from Pakistan was that the variant of concern was the so called South African variant. That wasn't the evidence from India, and the positivity of those travellers was higher from Pakistan than it was from India.
So the COVID test positivity was five per cent for travellers from India between 25 March and 7 April. It was six per cent for Pakistan and four per cent for Bangladesh.
But I was about to…but there is a variant of concern…
So how does your argument hold water?
Because I was explaining to you that the variant of concern out of Pakistan was the so called South African variant. There was no variant of concern. We put India on the red list on 23 April, you can check this…
And it was a month earlier than that that the first mutant variant was detected in India.
But the first variant of investigation was a full six days after we put India on the red list and then that variant moved to being a variant of concern a full two weeks after the 23 April. So we can only act on the evidence that we have. The important thing is to have really strong border controls. And I have to say, it's really important for the audience to understand this, and the point is really well made, Singapore, and I think Singapore was mentioned earlier, Australia has found the B1617.2, which is why they're having to take further precautions now in Singapore, and they are seen as best of breed in terms of their border controls throughout this pandemic. So I think the right thing to do is to follow the evidence and to act…
Okay.
…when the variant becomes a variant of concern, and that's what we did on India.
All right. Collette, you asked the question, you're shaking your head.
Yeah, thank you, Fiona. I want to get back to my question, Nadhim. Did your government fail by not closing the borders? On 9 April the cases in India were at 90,000 a day. It was reported all over the media, and, quite frankly, you didn't have to be a minister or a virologist to actually work out there's a problem here. I do believe that our government have done one thing… I feel like I'm in a groundhog day. Why do we have Brazilian, South African, Indian variants in our country? And if you remember to our COVID special back on 6 January we talked about playing the hokey-cokey. Our government  you don't know if you're coming or going or which way you're going to go round next. But one thing is clear, how many lives is this going to cost? You're doing testing all over the country, there's cases in 117 areas of the country now, and, quite frankly, what are you learning? What is your plan? You seem to be shooting from the hip and have absolutely no direction. I don't trust you.
How are you going to make Collette trust you then, Nadhim?
So I'll try and have a go. One is that the early evidence is that the vaccines work on the Indian variant, and the JCV or the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation bringing forward the second dose to eight week interval is making a difference. We are serge vaccinating in areas like Bolton and Blackburn and Darwin. We're also surge testing in those areas, and I think the thing to do is to make sure we continue to vaccinate at pace as Johnathan Van-Tam, the Deputy Chief Medical Officer, has said, this is a race between the vaccine and of course the test, trace and isolate, and the virus. The virus will continue to mutate, we have to make sure… Part of my role is to future proof the vaccination programme so that if there is a virus of concern we have a variant vaccine ready for it, which is why we're doing that work, and we'll talk more about that now, but…
Okay. That's not quite what Collette was talking about I don't think. But, Devi, let's hear from you.
Yeah, it is astonishing, because actually by the point we were discussing in early April you saw New Zealand stop all flights from India, including for their own nationals. You saw Hong Kong stopping flights. Countries can't completely seal themselves off, but they delayed the entry. The problem we now have is twofold. First, we're pretty sure it's pretty transmissible, at least as much as B117, if not more, and that means the race just became even faster to get those younger people, the 30s and 40 year olds, the 20 year olds, people like me as well who are just unvaccinated and completely susceptible. So things might open, my risk does not necessarily change because I have no additional protection. The second thing is does it evade our vaccines? And yes, the vaccines look remarkable, they are holding up. Get vaccinated, you're in a much better position. But there's some uncertainty, and we always know with uncertainty we have to be cautious because we just don't know, and once we know, we can act. But I think right now our Achilles heel in Britain has been the borders and making sure that we don't have these repeated lockdown cycles. Because I think right now domestic recovery should be the focus. Domestic tourism, getting local businesses going. Ask people to fill up our hotels here, fill up tours here, go to your local shops. Edinburgh's suffering. We don't have the festival on as normal. We have lots of people here. So I say go to restaurants, go to shops, enjoy your life, but do it here on this island. We've, what, 66 million people in Britain. That's enough people for me to be with for the next few months while we get through this problem.
Lots of hands up. Let's hear from some of you in our audience. Will.
Yeah. Six days before the variant became a concern, I mean, that's just absolute nonsense. Coronavirus is a concern, full stop. Who cares if it was a different variant? It should just not have happened, right? We've got such close ties with India that we were always going to get a surge if we didn't put them on the red list.
Chris.
Well, Nadhim, hopefully you'll remember me from 6 January episode. I shared a very personal story about this lady next to me, my mum who passed away from COVID. We're not learning. We're not learning. How many months on are we now? We're really not learning. This country, we have the ability, or we had the ability, should I say… It's already here. All the variants are here. The variants are affecting people, and it's here. There will be more variants that are coming. We had the opportunity to make the right decisions back then, six days before saying the Indian variant was a variant of concern. How many more lives are going to be lost to this because of these decisions that are being made? We are just going to keep going full circle. More people are going to lose their loved ones. I've already lost my mum, I don't want to lose anybody else and I don't want any of you to lose anybody else because of the bad decisions being made. Close the borders. Get this country vaccinated, and then let's recover. We have a brilliant country. Let's promote those staycations and let's keep ourselves safe. Thank you.
Richard.
Yeah, I think to answer Collette's question, time will tell. We're right in the middle of this 3D game of chess, and certainly where we're standing today with a bit of hindsight of course we wish that we'd have closed India off earlier and maybe delayed the spread of that virus coming to our shores. But I think we're still in the middle of this and therefore we do need more time effectively to judge. But the one thing I would just like to add is I think Nadhim and his team have done a remarkable job on the vaccine rollout, which of course is genuinely world leading and is well on the way to our ultimate cure which is of course getting everyone vaccinated. I think it has been really impressive. There's obviously a lot more to do, but ultimately that's our main battle against this awful disease.
Nadhim, are we going to be getting information tomorrow about quite how well the vaccination programme is working against the Indian variant? I noticed you were looking pretty chipper when you arrived at the studio today, I kind of got the feeling that good news might be coming. Can you tell us anything?
Well, obviously we're waiting to see more information from Public Health England, but the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation and of course the early clinical evidence from Oxford laboratory evidence is that the vaccines work on the so called Indian…the B1617.2 variant, and as Professor Van-Tam said yesterday that he's feeling it's maybe a little bit more infectious, so maybe 20, 30 per cent, not the 50 per cent more infectious. So we need to keep vaccinating at scale. The important thing is to continue with the vaccination programme, people come forward and test…
Okay. But in terms of what we might be hearing either tomorrow or the next few days, are you expecting good news?
Obviously Public Health England will share data when the data comes through on this.
Okay. I'll do my best to get it out of you, Nadhim. I'll keep trying throughout the programme. Harriet, did the government close the borders too late when it comes to India?
Well, I think already…
In fact, well, of course the border isn't closed because people can still come in from India but they now have to quarantine.
Indeed. I think many views have been expressed. I would just add three things. I think that this sense of, of course, borders is important, but this whole pandemic, we are only as a human race as strong as the weakest link. So the comments that were made earlier about the kneejerk reactions, I think firstly learning from… I don't know how organisations go about learning from other countries who are either more advanced or have had greater exposure…
But in terms of the question, Harriet…
Yes.
…sorry, just to really pin you down, did the government fail by not closing borders to India when they had the chance?
And all of last year when borders should have been shut, yes, of course.
Okay. Nick.
Yes, the government made a profound error by not adding India to the red list on 9 April with Pakistan and Bangladesh. Nadhim gave an explanation of a variant. That's the second different explanation I've heard from government ministers this week. The Health Secretary is claiming it's because the positivity rate in Pakistan was three times that of India, which the evidence doesn't bear out in any way, and won't even tell us what the source of that data is. It isn't something that was said later on. People were saying it at the time. I questioned it at the time, as did many, many others. It wasn't until 19 April, that's the point at which the Prime Minister cancelled that scheduled trip to India that was due on the 25th, then India was added on the red list on the 23rd. In those 14 days, by the way, from the 9th to the 23rd we think around about 20,000 arrivals from India… It was a blunder of the first magnitude. India should have been added to the red list on the 9th.
I just want to hear from a couple more people in our audience before I move on. In our audience, it's confusing, we've got two Richards here, but Richard in our audience.
All these numbers, are we really talking about the right thing? Do we do this thing, do we do that thing? All it is is politicking. There's only really two numbers that are important here and that's jab one and jab two. When we had the first lockdown we had that and we saw the numbers decline, then we opened up a little bit, the numbers went up again. We had the second lockdown, the numbers declined, we opened it up again, the numbers went up again. We've had the third lockdown, the numbers declined. We've opened it up again and they've stayed declined, and that's because people are getting the two jabs in. My question to Nadhim would be we know that, we know that's the only thing that's really working here. What are you going to do to increase those numbers so that we can really all be safe?
Okay. And let me hear from Hannah.
Hi, yeah, we're talking about India specifically and to Collette's question. I appreciate there may not have been a variant of concern, but we know that the coronavirus mutates when it's in high circulation. If you've got a very small, localised cases of coronavirus you're less likely to get a mutation. So based on the numbers that we had from India, based on what was happening, we know a variant was likely. So I think there may not have been a variant of concern, but it should have been expected. It wasn't unreasonable to expect a variant of concern and therefore to shut borders earlier before you found it. It wasn't unreasonable.
Okay. I'm going to move on and take another question now. We've had a number of people wanting to ask about this. Let's hear from Fatima Bhula.
Thank you. Is Great British Railways just another headline grabbing gimmick or will it actually make rail travel cheaper and more efficient?
So this is the announcement today by the government that Network Rail is effectively going to be subsumed over a period of time into Great British Railways which will also take charge, not only just of the infrastructure of the railways, but also of ticketing and timetables, certainly in England and Wales. Going to be slightly different in Scotland. Harriet, another gimmick? Is this going to make much of a difference?
I think firstly it appears from what's been shared that the commuters were really listened to. So I think it's always good when people are actually using the service are consulted, and it seemed a very intensive set of what are the issues we're dealing with.
I think there are two things from my perspective. One isn't gimmicky and the other one worries me. The first on one level of accountability, so the timeliness of the trains, the cleanliness, the schedule. There's a single point of responsibility and accountability. I think that makes sense, and listening to the inputs that have been received, that's good. What worries me is that with that single point of contact is this then the innovation that has had more people on trains than in any other time in the last century with the innovation, the creativity, will that all be lost because ministers, because government, because Whitehall run the trains? So I think…
So you're seeing that potentially as the dead hand of the state are you?
Yeah.
Okay. Nick, clearly that's not your view inasmuch as the more state involvement the better as far as you're concerned.
Well, no, that isn't my view. But I am concerned about the gap that exists between…
So what is Labour's policy then?
I'll come to that. I believe in a publically owned railway, and I'll come to that in a moment.
Yes. Exactly.
But in terms of this particular announcement I do worry about the gap between rhetoric and reality, because we've had in seven years, by the way, 60 different rail projects announced for the North of England by this government and we've yet to see a spade in the ground, so forgive me for being sceptical about this particular announcement. But my concern is this, my constituents and people around the country, what they want to see is an efficient railway available to them with reasonable phase and a timetable that works. Remember it was a disaster with the timetable in 2018 that led to this review being set up in the first place. My worry about the plans as they've been set out is, yes, there is that increased measure of public input. It is this arm's length government body it looks like that is going to have this central coordination. But you've still got concessions being run by private companies, and my real concern is that you end up, as it were, nationalising the risk and privatising the profit instead of making sure that it's value for money on the railways that we should be putting first.
Quite a few hands up here. Charlie, let's hear from you.
Thank you. I was just listening to Nick then and I think what he's saying is fundamentally wrong about the risk. However, generally I do think privatisation is a positive thing, but in this case, in the railways, it just hasn't worked. It's been a problem ever since it was brought in as a rush job at the end of the Major government. I was working in the legal sector when it came in 20 odd years ago, and the amount of fees that were generated by dealing with the private companies to get the rolling stock, to get everything… I mean, there was money just spewing out all over the place. If we can bring it back, let's just bring it back and let's make it sensible.
Okay. When you say bring it back do you mean bring it back into public ownership?
More so, yes. Although I'm a great fan of privatisation I just don't think it works on the railways.
Okay. And, Fatima, you asked this question, what's your view?
Well, I think while so ever the actual trains are being run by numerous companies with different ways of running and different innovations, I'm not really optimistic at all. I'm in the north and we had the Northern Rail fiasco for years and years. Pre-pandemic I used to travel all over the country, hundreds of miles a week using many different operators and it was just a nightmare, and I don't see it getting any better whilst so ever we've got different companies. So I think, yeah, public ownership is the only way.
Okay. Christina.
I live in the North East and one of the things that we noticed is that there was tremendous service offered by GNER, but when it came to reallocating the franchise the franchise was taken away from them, even though the customer satisfaction was very high, and since then it's just been worse and worse and worse. Now, yes, the government makes money out of franchises, but when they accept a bidder they shouldn't just be looking at the highest offer, they should actually be looking at how the previous franchisee has handled things. And if, as in the case of GNER, you have somebody who's doing a really good job, they should be automatically in prime position for a renewal of that franchise. Unless there is some reason why they've failed or they don't want to do it…
Okay. We…
…they should be given that opportunity, and then you wouldn't need to nationalise.
Okay. We hear your point there, Christina. Nadhim, isn't this one Conservative government putting right something that was done wrong by a previous Conservative government under John Major? He was the one obviously that created the franchises, created Network Rail, et cetera, which Grant Shapps today is saying just doesn't work?
Well, no. I think what Grant is saying is we've got to learn and improve. So you look at, say, Transport for London, TFL, you've got the Underground, you've got the over ground run by a different company, you've got Docklands is a private company. So you can have a system that can be better integrated under Great British Railways, and the bit of it that I think everyone should be looking forward to is 21 June there'll be flexible travel which will hopefully save consumers money…
You mean flexible season tickets?
Absolutely. So that is a real strength of being able to, as Harriet said, listen to the commuters, listen to people who are using railways and come up with what I think is a better system that keeps the innovation but also integrates it and delivers a better service and a better outcome for all of us that are using the railways.
Richard.
Yeah, it's a really interesting debate, this, because when you walk down the high street, and unfortunately for me there are many frozen pea purveyors and as a consumer you can go pretty much where you like. But if it's the water that comes out of your tap or indeed the train that I took from Crewe to Euston today you don't have that choice, and therefore perhaps surprisingly as a capitalist I'm actually all in favour of public ownership for monopolies. Now, if this is that I think that's a positive step forward, and I very much hope that it gives a better deal for consumers, not just in terms of price, which I know too well, but also in terms of service. So, yeah, I think it's a beneficial thing. But I'm repeatedly told by my dad – it was before my time – that National Rail was an absolute shambles. So nationalisation of trains isn't all it's cracked up to be.
You mean in the days of British Rail?
British Rail. So all I would say is that we properly fund this new facility so that as end consumers we get the best deal possible.
Okay. Sue, you had your hand up.
Yes, thank you. Yeah, I totally agree, I think we do need some investment in the railway. I can't remember the last time I went on a train. I live in rural Wales, it takes me 90 minutes to get to a mainline station, cost me over £100 just to get to London, and I can't even go from the south of Wales to the north, I have to go via England. So yeah, we need some investment and efficiency.
Steve.
Yeah, it seems that the private companies that run the rails always seem to be asking the government for handouts, and it just makes sense to me to cut out the middle man. If you remove a profit motive from those companies surely there's more money to spread around and actually use it for buying rolling stock and making the experience better.
Some of the money from the private companies is returned to the public purse, it's worth pointing out.
And, Devi, it's going to be done slightly differently in Scotland, because in Scotland the Scottish government is going to take over ticketing and timetabling and Great British Rail is going to take over the infrastructure. Is that going to be a better system? I mean, the government's saying the advantage of the system here in England and Wales is that you'll have one body, if you like, responsible for it all, and Scotland you're going to do things slightly differently.
Yeah. I mean, I can't speak specifically to a Scottish versus English question, but I think the point I'd like to make is climate change is a huge problem, and one of the only slightly positive things out of COVID has been reduction in air traffic which we know contributes to that, and I don't understand why it's so much cheaper and simpler to fly across the country than it is to take trains. So if the government's serious about climate change and about cutting down emissions, one of the simplest ways to subsidise…because it's so expensive, it's much cheaper to fly than to take a train, and I just don't understand that right now because people will take trains but you have to make it easy and simple and cheap.
Okay. We've got another question now from Martin Smith.
Can importing beef and lamb 12,000 miles be sustainable, sensible, and a good deal for British farmers?
So you are referring, Martin, I assume to the talk of this UK, Australia trade deal. There are lots of reports about tariff free access for Australia to the UK in terms of sending Australian beef and lamb over to the UK. These are just reports. We don't have any exact details yet. Richard.
Ultimately, no, I don't think it's particularly sustainable. As a planet we need to be eating less meat and better quality meat, and I think adding onto the huge carbon footprint of meat already by shipping it to the other side of the planet is probably not the smartest thing to do.
I mean, we do already do that of course with New Zealand lamb. Do you think customers will want meat from Australia if it's cheaper, basically?
No. Increasingly we're becoming British in our sourcing decisions, we're British chicken, British beef, because that's what customers want, and that's me and all of our competitors as well. I think it's maybe a bit of a false dichotomy, this, because there's a quota on New Zealand lamb at the moment which has never once been hit, and I think that's driven by the customer, but also it's driven by simple economics. If you're an Australian beef farmer then you're probably best following the money and selling it to your next door neighbour, China, and unfortunately their burgeoning demand for meat as opposed to a rainy, windswept island in the North Atlantic.
Australia's biggest beef export is saying that exports in the UK could increase possibly up to ten fold if a deal like this is done.
I don't see that from my perspective. I don't think customers want it, and I can't see that happening.
Harriet, is it a good deal? Is it sensible, is it sustainable, and could it offer a template for future deals?
Well, I don't think we know enough about the actual detail of this deal. But if you think we are no longer in the same position we were in the largest single market in the world in Europe, and so there is a requirement for government to be out negotiating trade deals. We already do close to 40 billion a year with Australia, we're their fifth largest trading partner, and I think other deals will need to be sought if we are to…not necessarily for beef. In fact, I spoke this morning to Australian colleagues and asked about this and they said, we haven't heard anything about this deal, no one here is talking about it.
Well, some of them are, because they've been on the airwaves in the UK from Australia. But, anyway…
But the actual radio and TV… Because the question I asked was, what will you be getting from us? If we're supposedly getting your beef, what will you be getting from us, and no one seemed to know. So I do think trade deals and finding ways to create markets, the pan transpacific market that was being developed, I think you will see more of that, but I think consumers will make choice based on what's right for them, about sustainable eating locally, but trading partners with New Zealand, Australia, Indonesia, Singapore, these will become very much more important when the market we were in has inexorably changed, and it was the largest in the world.
My buyers are telling me actually it won't be that cheap by the time it ends up on our shores.
Indeed.
Whist it's very cheap to produce, when you add on the transportation costs actually our calculations are that it won't be so cheap at the end of it.
Martin, let me come back to you. You're a dairy farmer, not a beef and lamb farmer, but what's your view and that of other farmers that you're talking to?
I think, like Richard said, I spoke to some sheep farmers today to do some research on it and they were saying that really Australia are going to export to China. There's not a huge amount of product that actually hits our shore at the moment. They're not hitting their quotas that are actually available to them. And it's almost a bit of a false… I think the SNP have kind of stirred it up with the crofter debate and saying it was going to put other farms out of business. But a crofter is not competing on the mass market supermarket shelf.
I mean, it's worth saying that Mark Drakeford in Wales has also been very vocal about it, and I know that a number of farming representatives have voiced the opinion that they feel farmers are being thrown under the bus. Nadhim, one concern expressed by some in the farming communities is that if this deal with Australia goes ahead it will be a template for other big, almost industrial scale meat producers such as Brazil, other countries in South America, for example. Is that a concern?
Well, a couple of things on that. One, I would certainly, whether I was in politics or outside of politics, feel a lot happier that it is our accountable politicians, Liz Truss, negotiating these deals on our behalf versus what deals we would have to live with and our farmers have to live with which is being negotiated by a group of commissioners that represent 27 countries in Europe, so actually the accountability, and we're having this debate here today, is a good thing. But let's wait and see…
But will this deal be a good thing?
Well, let's wait and see what this deal looks like. It will absolutely be one that protects our high quality farming, our animal husbandry. That is not for negotiation. So let's wait and see what the deal looks like. But if you step back a second it's actually a good thing, as Harriet says, that we are negotiating trade deals for ourselves and we make those decisions and we have to go out and explain to our public as to why these things are good and how we're protecting…
Well, that's why I'm asking what… But we're not really getting the details from the government.
Well, no. But what I'm saying to you is until we have the details we can't really have a discussion as the details at the moment are being negotiated. All I would say to our farmers is that the high quality of farming and animal husbandry is not to be negotiated. That is not to be compromised in any trade deal negotiation.
Okay. Dale.
I just think we need to start going back to home grown in the UK, our meat and everything that we have that we need for food. That should be our first point of call. Obviously it gets down the air miles, CO2, helps the environment and everything. So let's start looking at growing things and producing things in Great Britain, because we're a great country and we make amazing products, and we can sell them across the world, and citizens across the world want to buy it, so let's start looking at us first.
Charlie.
Yeah, it strikes me this is a bit of a non-issue to be perfectly honest, because, as Martin said, there will be a demand for the Australian meat going to China and the Far East, and, as Richard said, hopefully as UK customers we will chose in the supermarket the food that we want to eat, and hopefully we will chose British, but ultimately it will be our choice. I don't want to have it regulated by anyone about my choice, which is again what Nadhim was saying about the EU commissioners. Let's widen the range of what we can have and let's make more sensible choices ourselves.
Devi.
Yeah, and this also comes into a public health issue, because part of the reason that the UK was hit so hard with COVID-19 was because we had a public health problem. A lot of people weren't in the best physical condition because of unhealthy diet. And why is that? Because it's really expensive to eat well and to eat local and to eat vegetables and have fresh meat. So for me looking at this issue it should be actually how do we look at our food ecosystem right now in Britain and say how do we make it easier for people to make healthy and affordable choices so that in the next pandemic we can come out of this looking much better instead of revealing all the inequalities that we have already in terms of what you can access based on what is available and what it costs.
Nick, is this Australia trade deal a good deal for Britain?
Well, it depends on its terms. I'm certainly in favour of completing a trade deal with Australia, but it has to contain a level playing field for our famers. So let's take, for example, hill farmers in my native Wales. Clearly it's going to be more difficult for them to compete with farmers in Australia on climate, for example, on space, on animal welfare standards and environmental standards which are higher here in the United Kingdom. So that has to be taken into account in putting this deal together. I'd expect the Australian government to stand up for its agricultural interests, of course it would. Our government must do the same and not sell out our farmers.
Okay. Lots of nodding there from our audience I can see. Let's take a last question now from Will Drakes.
Hi. Should the UK and the international community be doing more to help Israel and Palestine find a meaningful, long lasting resolution?
A ceasefire has been declared, so there has been progress of a sort after days of shelling and violence. Nadhim, should the UK be doing more to help find a long lasting solution? Because who knows how long this particular ceasefire will last.
The simple answer is yes, and we have been doing. The Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab and the US Secretary of State Antony Blinken have worked tirelessly, one, to deescalate the situation… Obviously President Biden has made a huge difference, as has our Prime Minister to urge both sides…
But there is no peace process at the moment. Is there anything the UK can do with the international community to try and foster a situation where that can start again?
Well, we continue to work with our allies to at least attempt to try to get to a sustainable two state solution. That is where we need to land. I think this tragedy that has unfolded, and I think I it really is… Israelis, innocent children having rockets fired at them from the terrorist group Hamas or, sadly, innocent lives lost in Gaza. It is…
In Israel as well.
In Israel, absolutely right. And we need to strain every sinew, as I think the US administration is equally committed to to get to a sustainable two state solution.
Harriet.
Yes, I agree with Nadhim, and I think that there's also a dimension in the horror of this that we have all seen. The extent to which fake news is used by all parties to intensify the suffering. It adds no value other than to escalate and to polarise.
And what you're referring to there is a number of videos that have been circulated online from both sides which have been showing violence that actually either took place at a different time or was actually in a different country.
Different wars, different time.
So in terms of the UK and the international community trying to find a long lasting solution… I mean, what we've seen in the last few days has been horrifying…
Yeah.
We now have a ceasefire. Who knows how fragile that is.
Yes.
What more can be done?
I certainly think that if those efforts that you described are happening they haven't been visible to us. So I think that re-establishing a peace process that… I mean, if this is not managed the escalation that we've just seen, if this extrapolates from just the escalation of the last couple of weeks I think it means this has to be a priority, not just for our government or the American government, but we need a fully established peace process to try and find a path to the two state solution again.
Carlos.
Yeah, I was also very upset by some of the propaganda on social media, and on this issue, like many others, I'm often left thinking that the reason why fake news is so effective is that we really don't know enough about the issue. I think the origins of these problems I don't think we discuss them enough in the media so it leaves us quite vulnerable to that manipulation.
Charlie.
Thanks. Yes. I mean, obviously, yes, we should do more, however I'm not really sure what we should be doing, apart from engaging. It's so tricky. But if we can try and get to a situation where we start without blaming people or either side for stuff that was done in the past and let's just say, right, where do we want to get to and how do we get there, rather than bringing back references to things that have gone wrong in the past.
Richard in the audience.
Thank you, Fiona. Yeah, I agree with Charlie there. Do we actually know what the two sides want here? And ultimately I'm not too sure that we can ever arrive at a solution where the two sides can work together. The best I think we can hope for is that each side works in their own little worlds under their own little cultures and if there is any interaction between the two it's on some kind of guidelines that maybe we could produce something for. But to try and get some kind of coming togetherness, this is too deep rooted for that in my opinion, and really it's a case of let's live in our own communities and take it from there.
Devi.
Yeah. I mean, we have international human rights law exactly for this and we have seen clear breaches of it. We have seen children under attack, we have seen medical facilities under attack, doctors as well as journalists. These are supposed to be protected groups and yet we have seen even today the head of Gaza's COVID-19 programme killed which will have ramifications for the people living there. So I guess it's a deep problem. There's no easy solutions. But the international community need to come back to that there have been agreed international law and that states need to abide by that and try to get that compliance through pressure of the international community.
And this is a final reflection, whether it's Israel and Palestine, whether it's about what's happening in the States among black men and the police, it's just such a shame that so many of these issues we forget the humanity in each other, that actually we're all people, we want to be happy and have meaning and live our lives, and we get caught up on religion and beliefs and skin colour and our differences when actually when you travel across the world most people are pretty similar in terms of what they want out of their lives.
In terms of the role of the UK government, you think about the ceasefire that was brokered in 2014, Egypt played a major role in that. There was the Oslo channel many years previously. What can the UK actually be doing meaningfully to try and bring together some kind of understanding in the Middle East, in Israel and Palestine particularly?
Well, the UK does have diplomatic weight around the world that it can use. I think the scenes we've seen over recent days have been awful and distressing, seeing the consequences of the Hamas rockets that have been fired into Israel and the consequence of the Israeli air strikes in Gaza, the schools, the hospitals, hundreds of civilians dead and so many children has been truly terrible.
Now that there is a ceasefire I think the UK government really needs to redouble its efforts on two things. I think in the immediate term we need to get humanitarian aid into Gaza urgently and to be building the alliances around the international community for that to happen. Secondly then to continue with the pressure for a genuine peace process. There is no way forward in my view apart from a secure Israel that is safe in its borders and a viable state of Palestine, and I believe that the UK government must use its diplomatic weight now to achieve those two things.
Christina.
One of the things that concerns me most is that the stated aim of Hamas is the total annihilation of the state of Israel. That's not something that you're going to be able to just negotiate away or say, well, would you be satisfied with just a little bit of annihilation on the side? The other concern I have is that a lot of this seems to be being funded by Iran and I think we're taking our eye of the ball here. Iran has been held down by Trump, but now I think Joe Biden is almost backing out of being a decent ally to Israel, and I don't think any responsible world leader should be backing away from a country which is only trying to defend itself in the face of a threat which is a total threat. It's not just let's teach them a lesson, this is destruction. It's an anti-Jewish [voices overlap 0:57:16], if you like. So let's look at where the money is coming from to fund this, [voices overlap 0:57:22]…
Okay, Christina, we hear you. I'm just going to cut in, sorry, because I've not got much time left and I've just got to let Richard here on the panel get a word in as well. Forgive me.
No, it's absolutely heart breaking. It's also a complicated geopolitical issue with a lot of history and therefore I think at times like this as a humble shop keeper it's quite important to put your hands up and not profess to have any superior knowledge to what we all read in the papers or see on the TV. The one thing I have noticed however is potentially the one thing that unifies both sides is a disillusionment in the current political leadership and therefore one day the strong men will step aside or step down and lead to younger more progressive leaders who are more committed to a two state solution.