Will we be allowed to go on a holiday this year abroad?
Will we, Vaughan?
I think it's impossible to say is the honest truth, and that's part of the difficult that we still face now. For all the progress we've made, and it's the hard-won sacrifices that people of Wales has meant we're in a position where coronavirus rates are now under 40 in 100,000, we know that in other parts of the world where we would normally have holidays the rates are rising, so mainland Europe in particular there are real challenges there
We also know there are new variants that are likely to come from other parts of the world as well and they could be really damaging to us and actually adversely impact our of course very successful vaccination programme. So I'm not planning to go on a foreign holiday this year.
And presumably you're not going to be in a great rush if you've got Mark Drakeford saying that the idea that we will have international travel back as it was before in the middle of May fills me with horror, that's what he says. Does it fill you with horror?
Well, I had to make choices and I've had to make choices all through this crisis of course, and I made choices to change the rules on travel, on testing, while there were planes in the air coming back from Zante in particular, and that's because of the evidence that international travel was reimporting coronavirus into Wales when actually remember that last summer we had rates down as low as two in 100,000, so we saw coronavirus come into the UK largely because of the February half-term over a year ago, we saw rates increase again at the end of the summer, significantly because of international travel as well.
So, you know, I think that international travel in the way that we were used to before, and frankly I'm one of those people who enjoyed going to different parts of the world, but I still think for the great majority of us that's going to be put off for some time to come because the risk of coronavirus being reintroduced with all the harm it's caused economically, in mental health as well as the physical health crisis, I think they're too great a risk. But we'll have to see what happens in this country and of course in the rest of the world.
So it's not sounding fantastically likely for the summer, I think from that. Claire?
I think that we have to ask how we think the vaccine has worked. I mean, I think it's been a brilliant success, hasn't it? And consequently, we should be safe, we should be protected, we should be in a position where if we go on holiday, we're not going to reimport coronavirus, that's not the way it works. We have got a situation where fantastically we are now largely as a society not at the same risks because of the vaccine situation and consequently, I think to accept the draconian measure of a government, for example, banning you from leaving your own country is something that we should be very sceptical about.
I'm sure a lot of people will be frightened to travel but I do think that people should be able to weigh up risks. I also haven't liked a certain tone which is this idea that anyone who goes on holiday is just being selfish and indulgent and that somehow that's a degenerate thing to do when in fact people do need to exert their freedom at this point. There have been terrible stories and people need the opportunity to relax and I do think holidays are part of that.
Claire is wrong about part of that because actually the reality is that we do know that there are other variants in other parts of the world that are a risk to us. That's why you can travel now but there are quarantine measures in place as well. So if you want to go and have a week in the sun, you've got to bank on the real prospect that you're going to spend ten days in quarantine when you come back, and for many families, that means that that isn't going to be a real option.
Okay, let's see what our audience has got to say about it, Kuabina?
Hi, I just think it's also important to think about the countries that we do travel to. Obviously as us Brits will have the vaccine, that doesn't stop us from transmitting it to other people, and if we do go out to holidays in places like Europe who don't have as many people vaccinated, we could also cause a knock-on effect to those countries. I think we need to be mindful of the effects that we have on those other countries as well, because as we've seen, the pandemic is a global issue, and if it's not fixed in one area, it will always come back to us, so I think that's something we should be mindful of as well.
Okay, Katie?
Hiya, basically, yes, so my example is that my mum moved to France last year and I've not been able to see her since then, and I think much as I completely get not going abroad, I do get it, I get the vaccine not being rolled out as much over there, it all makes sense genuinely, but I think it's like if there was a better way that it was handled when people were coming into the country initially, or even now, like, should we not have come up with some kind of better system by now a year in so that we know that when people are coming in, like…even like I've been to France sort of last summer and I came back and I got the train home from London and no one called me for ten days.
I stayed in my house for ten days, of course I did, but no one would have known if I had or not, and it's stuff like that I kind of think it's like…if that was a better system in place in that sense…
You might be able to travel more if there was a stricter system, do you think?
Yes, if everything else came together with the vaccine and everything like that, then it should effectively equal a better system by now, should it not?
Ian?
Yes, hello. It would be nice for somebody to tell us what we have to do to achieve the freedoms that we had before. They keep on about it needs to be low, it needs to be down. Do we need to be like New Zealand and Australia, every time they get an infection it just shuts down? To me, that can't continue to happen. New Zealand and Australia have to eventually open up and you can guarantee that they're going to get some sort of infection in there and you can't go along hoping that it's just going to disappear, because it's not, and you've got to go back to some sort of normality and we need to be told when that or what we need to achieve to get to that point.
I mean, Nigel, with the vaccination programme which has gone so well in the UK, the promised sunlit uplands always seem to be just that bit out of reach, don't they?
Yes, it does. I think you've got to put people's safety and health first at the forefront of things. I think most people would love to go away on holidays but…
Have you made any plans?
No, I haven't, no, and I wouldn't make any plans. I've been following the guidelines, what we are told because I think it's crucially important that…there's no point us…in the situation we have, it's been a very, very difficult year for many, many people, for many, many different reasons, and all the hard work that's gone in by everybody involved in getting to the stage where we are today and getting the vaccines out, getting people vaccinated, bringing the numbers down, we have to be very, very careful we don't do anything to undo all that important work.
Ian?
Yes, hello. It would be nice for somebody to tell us what we have to do to achieve the freedoms that we had before. They keep on about it needs to be low, it needs to be down. Do we need to be like New Zealand and Australia, every time they get an infection it just shuts down? To me, that can't continue to happen. New Zealand and Australia have to eventually open up and you can guarantee that they're going to get some sort of infection in there and you can't go along hoping that it's just going to disappear, because it's not, and you've got to go back to some sort of normality and we need to be told when that or what we need to achieve to get to that point.
So we need to listen to the experts and follow the advice on it and, look, I'm the same as everybody else, you know, the sooner things can get back to normal, the better it is for everybody, but I think we need to be very, very sensible in the way that we do that, and we have to really listen from the people that know best about it and follow the guidance that are in place to do that, I think.
Andrew?
Yes, I think going back to the question that Daniel put, this year are we likely to be able to travel, I'd like to think that there is that hope that we can travel at some point this year, but we have to be led by the data, we have to be led by the science on this, we've got the report, or should I say the UK government has this report coming now about 5 or 6 April that's going to inform the decision of opening up on 17 May, so that's a big day, that is, to understand exactly what the science is telling us.
: But I do build on the point that other…I think Katie made the point about having the systems in place to deal with the situation we face, and I think that's really important. We're going to have to learn to live with COVID, it's not going to disappear but I do find it as a politician hugely frustrating when I put the telly on and I see advertising on there advertising to go to Turkey, to go to Australia the other night was on television.
Well, what about coming to Wales?
Well, I think staycation is going to be the big market. I think everyone…
And do you think English or Scottish or Northern Irish tourists should be welcomed here in Wales?
I very much hope so, so long as the conditions are suitable and allow for that, because actually it will boom business to come to the best part of the United Kingdom, and that's what we need to be doing is promoting this as a golden opportunity for the staycation market here in Wales, but going back to the point that Daniel was making about travelling, I do hope that we get to a situation where we can travel at some point in this year.
We've got a few more hands up here. Andy?
I personally think there's an opportunity to sort of suspend holidaying abroad and boost the British economy and the Welsh economy by holidaying locally, as Andrew just said, and I think that's hugely important, not to risk transmission coming in from abroad but I do think there's a situation where maybe people need to travel abroad to visit family members that they haven't seen for maybe 12 or 18 months so I think maybe special exceptions should be given for that kind of situation.
Jamie?
Just to pick up on a point that Andrew RT Davies mentioned then, we're still seeing holidays being advertised on the television so have the Welsh Government shared this information that it's unlikely that international travel is going to happen? Because it's giving false hope and the industry are looking to survive. For me personally, I'm happy to stay at home for a staycation and support local businesses to get back on their feet, I'm not looking to go around the world, but surely this lack of a roadmap and telling the holiday companies not to advertise on TV and not to go to the expense and everything else, why hasn't the Welsh Government shared this information early with the holiday companies and the travel agencies?
Well, the decision to travel abroad is a UK Government policy.
It's not a secret about the risks for international travel, and those companies know that.
Let me come to Adam, we haven't heard from you.
Yes, I think Jamie's broader point though is absolutely correct, because I think that, you know, it's about getting the balance right and I realise every government in the world faces this difficulty of aligning the different priorities but I think business need notice. I think most businesses would accept, look, they're not expecting reopening tomorrow or a date in June even for the removal of all restrictions, but they do need some notice, and I think the Welsh Government is not getting the balance right at the moment in terms of providing some sense of a direction of travel, the criteria that would be central to the decisions and some sense of what's going to happen in April and May.
I think in terms of international travel, you know, I agree with Nigel, really, look, we all want to get back to the position where we can have all the liberties back, the freedoms that we lost, but I think so many people have sacrificed and we don't want to risk what we've gained in terms of driving the level of the virus right down.
Okay, Claire, you wanted to come back in?
I just wanted to clarify, I mean, we keep being told, you know, we have to follow the data not the dates, but actually the data is well ahead of where we thought it would be. We're told that we should listen to the experts and in fact the experts have stressed that the different variants from different countries, you know, this idea of a foreign variant versus a domestic, there's going to be variants on a virus like this, homegrown or foreign, and you don't want to get into a xenophobic anti-foreign point here. And that actually what's different, Adam has just mentioned last summer, is that we have the vaccination and that means that largely speaking the threat of the different variants are not as severe, at all, and my concern is that although we talk about following the science and following the data, actually these end up being kind of politically driven cautious decisions…I mean, I don't mind if people have staycations, that's fine, but I am concerned about carrying on this kind of talk of…which effectively induces fear in people, makes them frightened, when they don't need to be.
So I just think that, you know, even this idea that it's irresponsible for people to advertise holidays, I mean, we have to build a future and we have to have some hope and we have a tourism industry, and that tourism industry is not based on staycations alone, and that's jobs, by the way, that's important. So I do think we have to be careful that we don't say we're following the science but actually just end up with a bit of scaremongering.
Okay, let me take another question now from Christopher Reese.
The Prime Minister has warned that Europe's third wave could wash up on our shores. Do you agree that vaccine nationalism is now the greatest threat to public health in the UK and Europe?
Andrew?
Well, I think the numbers that are coming out of Europe are really concerning. I mean, in France today, it was reported that 65,000 cases were reported of COVID. That's back to where we were, well, two months ago in this country.
And I guess we're looking at them now as they were once looking at us.
And no one wishes to see that, but that's the great success that we've had here in the UK is that UK vaccination programme, and I think it will be a very, very dark day if some of the rhetoric that the European Union have talked about enacting to take hold of vaccine that is contractually obliged to the UK and the consequences of that would be severe, I would suggest, because actually what we need is as much vaccination to flow around the globe so that we can get on top of the virus wherever it might be rather…
I mean, the EU's point is that we're not exporting any, obviously that we've had many millions of doses from companies within the European Union and we haven't exported any.
With respect to the EU, we've obviously got clear contractual obligations with the manufacturers…
Which obviously they dispute as well. I'm just putting their point of view.
Well, I don't think they dispute it, it's a fact that their contract is two months later than ours and equally it's not as strong as our type of contract because in the European contract, it states that they have to use reasonable or best endeavours to secure that vaccine for the European market, whereas our contract is more explicit, so I do think this is…
Well, it also…sorry, it also says that in our contract too, but there are lots of bits that are redacted so it's not totally clear.
But our market, we were there two months before, we were in there getting the vaccine, and we were able to unilaterally do it, and I think that's really important. We got a real success story on our hands. I passionately hope that the European Union don't enact the language that they're talking and make that a reality because I think that would be disastrous and protectionism will serve no one any good at all on this particular issue. Let's celebrate a success story in the UK, let's try and help the European Union through their current dilemma, and ultimately when we do get the vaccine rollout across the globe, we really will be on top of the COVID crisis.
Nigel?
Yes, you know, I think what you can't be is selfish and keep it all for yourself, you know? We need to be sure that we as a country get on top of it, you know, within our own communities and family, but we also need, if we can and when the time is right, to help other countries as well, but it's…
But isn't that the crux of the matter? Because rightly or wrongly the EU is accusing us of keeping it for ourselves, and the UK Government, Liz Truss, for example, saying we need to vaccinate our entire population before we even think about allowing vaccinations to be…
But it's a global pandemic, isn't it? And we need to get on top of it globally, I think, and, you know, if the boot was on the other foot that the other countries were keeping the vaccination and not giving us anything, we certainly wouldn't be happy, so I think there needs to be a little bit of common sense and a little bit of balance and transparency and honesty, and yes, we need to get on top of it, we need to get it out within our own communities and within our society, but also as well we must make sure that we do all we can as well in helping other countries as well to get on top of it. I think that's hugely important.
So do you think we should start exporting vaccines from the UK before we've vaccinate our entire population, for example?
I think it's getting the balance right, as I said. I don't think we can sort of stop vaccinating within our country and then send everything abroad. We need to get the balance right and get the numbers right and hopefully abroad and the other countries as well can apply that bit of common sense to the way that they want to do it as well. So I think we need to keep vaccinating this country, but also make sure that we do all we can in encouraging and making sure other people get vaccinated in other parts of the country as well, because what you've got to remember is people have family, friends in other countries as well who will need the vaccine, so it's not a time to be selfish now. It's time for everybody to pull together and help each other and that includes us helping each other in this country, and when an opportunity is there to help other people in other countries as well.
And that's what it comes down to, Adam, is when is that opportunity? When is that moment, if we were to follow what Nigel's suggesting, that we should be helping other countries, when could that be?
Well, you know, I think it's absolutely right that no one is safe until everyone is safe. We're facing a global pandemic, there's the clue, we beat this virus all together or not at all, and so as well as it being the morally right thing and ethically right thing to help others, there's actually a bit of enlightened self-interest here as well, isn't it, because if we don't actually work together with our European neighbours but actually more broadly than that, look about the issue of the vaccine in developing countries. There's a massive role there and the UK is in a strong position to provide moral leadership. The fact that there…
So do you think the government is right to suggest that we should vaccinate our entire population before we start thinking about shipping some of our vaccines out to other countries?
No, I think that we need to start to have those conversations now. There hasn't been enough global cooperation. Because ultimately that is in our own interests, in terms of the safety of our own communities, because we were just talking about importing new variants.
So to not vaccinate everyone here, vaccinate, what, some people here, all the adults, and then start sending abroad?
I think the best…look, the idea of the vaccine trade war is the most depressing thing I've heard after the last 12 months and the best thing that happened last night was the EU and the UK saying, look, let's work together, let's work together and let that be part of having global cooperation because that's what we need. We're only going to beat this virus if everyone works together, that's the approach that we've got to take.
Can I just bring the point in though, which is really important as well, Europe aren't helping themselves when you've got the comments of President Macron and Angela Merkel, ultimately the AstraZeneca vaccine is a good solid vaccine that will help us in the fight against this COVID crisis, and sometimes they just need to look in the mirror at some of the points they've been making.
Alison.
I think we should vaccinate everyone in this country before we start exporting it. I think the fact that we were organised and got our orders in earlier than everyone else, I think that's a big flag wave for us and I think there's a lot of bitterness in Europe because, well, we've left now and anything now that they can do to fire at us or to try and paint us in any sort of bad light or anything, they're trying to do, and I think this vaccination scenario now is an ideal opportunity for them.
Sarah?
Yes, I think there is a bit of a concern that all the good work that we've done and the trust in AstraZeneca that we've been given could be kind of undermined if the supply chain gets broken. I mean, I'm really hopeful that the discussions held between the Prime Minister and the EU yesterday will facilitate some resolution but, you know, sometimes the EU have not always held their end and we've noticed that in Brexit about the negotiations breaking down, so how much confidence can we have in those negotiations?
Camilla?
We've bought far more vaccines than we actually need and it seems very dog in the manger-ish not to be sharing it and not to be sending it abroad, and the rate limiting factor for our vaccination programme is physical giving of the vaccines day by day. We have far more vaccines than we actually need.
I mean, we've ordered far more than we need. We haven't actually got in the UK at this moment more than we need. I mean, would you be prepared to give up your vaccine, say, Camilla, for another country?
I can't say that because as a healthcare worker, I've had mine, so I'm sorry, I can't really answer that one. But I think that it is very important that we think altruistically as a global community because just bringing it back to the first question, none of us are going to really feel safe going on holiday until the other countries are safer than they currently are.
Claire?
This is a very important question because it's not the way it's been presented at all, you know? The idea that we're hoarding vaccines and stopping the Europeans getting the AstraZeneca vaccine is a nonsense.
They actually…different countries in the EU, France and Germany, but other countries, Italy as well, have been storing vaccines and not giving them to their own people. They had a certain amount, millions of AstraZeneca vaccines which they actually deployed and said, oh no, we don't think it's safe, they used the precautionary principle in that way, frightened people, there's now a high level of vaccine scepticism in many countries in the EU, and so I think we have to remember what's happened. And the trade war, such as it's been threatened, I mean, I'm not…everything that the UK does is not perfect by any stretch but in this instance, the EU call the shots on that. They deployed a form of protectionism which I think is very frightening, you know, it really has ramped up tensions.
The other thing we have to bear in mind is AstraZeneca and the Oxford scientists who developed it specifically made sure that AstraZeneca was a cheap vaccine that could be used by all parts of the world, all over the place. I mean, if we did have any spare, by the way, I would want to give it to those countries a lot poorer than those in the European Union, as it happens. But it's also the case that that is a cheap vaccine, and the UK has actually invested huge amounts of money in helping vaccine rollout round the world. So there's this presentation that is just topsy-turvy that somehow England's greedily sitting on all these vaccines when actually Ursula von der Leyen has been irresponsible in the extreme and the European Commission in making political hay of a health situation and actually it's the people in Europe and the different European countries that I feel most sorry for, in France and in Germany, where the vaccination take-up is very low and when they didn't use those vaccines and that seems to me to be tragic but we shouldn't rewrite this story in a way that makes it seem as though this is greedy England sitting on…greedy UK sitting on…greedy Wales sitting on excess vaccines. That's just not the reality of the situation.
Well, the question, Vaughan, is do you agree that vaccine nationalism is now the greatest threat to public health in the UK and Europe?
No, I don't but I think everyone just needs to take a step back and calm down. I think the rhetoric for some of the comments and the commentary around this is really unhelpful for all of us.
Coming from where?
From lots of different sides, actually, I think. I think it's been some of the European leadership I don't think has been helpful, some of the comments from this side I don't think have helped that either. What we do have is a situation where we have ordered more than enough to vaccinate the UK. The reality is we're going to vaccinate our population but we also need to see the balance that Nigel's referred to about how we have a balance in helping other parts of the world, Europe and others, and in Europe, now that there's clear acceptance on the safety and efficacy of AstraZeneca, they need to get on with vaccinating people with the vaccines they've got, and lots of this is about a commercial dispute between the European Union and the vaccine companies, and it's about us not muddying the waters and making it more difficult.
And do you think here in the UK, we should vaccinate our own population first before we start exporting vaccines?
Yes, I think that's exactly what we're going to do because…
That is what we're going to do?
Yes, because we've got contracts and supplies that are coming in, we've a real success story here in Wales, every UK nation can be proud of its own vaccination programme, it's just a matter of fact that we have done even better than other countries. We're going faster than elsewhere. That's a real matter of pride and we're going to finish the job with the vaccines we've got. But I fully expect that there will be help from the UK to other parts of the world, but everyone just needs to calm down, because members of the public rolling in and saying it's the Europeans, it's the Brits, well, I just think that's really unhelpful. It's about getting supplies to all parts of the world as quickly as possible, and I have conversations with Conservative ministers about this, people who are my opponents politically but we have grown-up conversations and I speak with the vaccine companies themselves as well. So it's about how quickly we can all go to make us all safe.
Briefly, Andrew.
But in fairness the rhetoric has been dialled up on the continent of Europe. Twice now they've come back with various measures. I want to see the vaccine programme be a success in Europe as well but we're not the people sending military police into factories to seize vaccines like the Italians did the other day. That is dialling up the dial way too loud, and what we've got to work together…I haven't heard UK Government ministers threatening any action in retaliation to what the European Union have…
Actually, I think there has been some unhelpful commentary from some parts of the UK Government.
Well, quote it.
I think you'll find the Foreign Secretary hasn't been wonderfully helpful with all of his comments. I also think when we're talking about people respecting it…
Like what in particular, Vaughan, are you referring to?
People respecting international obligations and international agreements that are made is not something the UK comes with entirely clean hands.
So hang on, you've just said that Dominic Raab made unhelpful comments, what are you referring to in particular?
I think when he's been talking about comments about the situation with Europe and it's the tone of what's said, and it's the tone that matters in all this, that's why everyone needs to take a step back and calm down, because actually we've got a real success story on our hands with effective vaccines being produced, we're going really quickly in Wales and the rest of the UK and that's what we all need to focus on.
The Foreign Secretary referred to the EU as acting like a dictatorship, I mean, you know, if that isn't inflammatory language then what is? It doesn't help anyone talking like that.
They should stop acting like a dictatorship then.
Oh, here we go again.
And you see, that's the problem, if that's the discourse we have, that helps no one. And that will make people frightened, that is scaremongering, that's really unhelpful and it's in all of our interests to go as quickly as possible…
Okay, no, we've heard you make that point.
All the vaccines are safe and effective and let's get on with it.
Okay, talking about let's get on with it, we've got another question here from Craig Davis.
Hi, right, it's today been announced that NHS staff in Scotland will get a four per cent pay rise that will be backdated to December 2020 to recognise the hard work they've done during this crisis. What should Wales do?
So this was announced yesterday in Scotland. Adam, a four per cent pay rise for NHS staff in Wales?
I think we should match them, you know? That's the least that our NHS staff deserve, and, you know, if we don't give NHS staff a significant real terms increase in pay after everything that's happened in the last 12 months, what does it say about what we are as a society? We clapped them but let's turn that respect and support into something real, and do you know what?
We've actually seen a real-terms cut in pay of NHS staff going back over ten years. That's why we're facing a problem in terms of recruitment and retention, people are burned out and part of that…pay isn't the only thing we need to do, by the way, we need to have more staff in the NHS, we need another 1,000 doctors, 4,000 extra nurses, but pay is part of saying as a society we value you, and I think well done the Scottish Government for showing up the Conservatives what they are, offering a real-terms pay cut to our NHS staff, and we in Wales should at least follow Scotland's lead and that's what I will do as a Plaid Cymru First Minister.
Andrew, I assume you don't agree with that and you think one per cent is plenty?
Well, I notice Adam's just given a pay cut from his first offer which was 12 per cent because when I was on a programme with him recently he was saying that they should have 12 per cent.
As someone who comes from a family who's got midwives, GPs, cystic fibrosis specialist nurses involved, I believe we should be rewarding our dedicated NHS workers and carers to the full value that we possibly can as a country. That's why we…
So what does that mean in practice?
Well, that's why we have a pay review system independent of government that makes these types of recommendations and I think it is really important for retention that that pay review body looks at all the evidence and delivers a real increase to our workers in the NHS who tirelessly worked and been those bridges of compassion to families in this really difficult crisis. I do not…
But a real increase would be more… I'm sorry to interrupt, but a real increase would be more than one per cent because we know inflation is going to be over that, so you don't support the one per cent then?
If I was First Minister in Wales I would deliver whatever recommendation came out the pay review board because that's the appropriate mechanism to decide the pays and terms and conditions of our NHS staff…
But one per cent wouldn't be enough, by your definition?
I don't believe it would be enough, no, and that's why I've been making a stronger recommendation to the pay review body, but I wouldn't be going arbitrarily around with numbers that I know weren't sustainable over the period and, as I said, when I was on a programme with Adam Price recently, he was talking about a 12 per cent pay rise, he's now gone to four per cent.
No, I said we should at least match the Scottish Government, I know what I said, it was only a few moments ago, we should at least match what the Scottish Government have done. Yes, the RCN is quite strongly making a compelling case for the 12.5 per cent increase because we've had that level of cut in real terms over the last ten years, but at least do what the Scottish Government has done and yes, let's aim to do more because absolutely we rely on these people and we've clapped them and what we've seen from the Conservative government is they are refusing to actually turn that into real support.
No, I think the First Minister will jump on any bandwagon that goes along, Adam Price. I would listen to the evidence and make the pay recommendation stick here in Wales that we could value our workers wherever they are, in the health sector or the care sector and not jump on the bandwagon.
Claire Fox.
What, supporting the unions is jumping on a bandwagon? You've got to listen to the workers that are actually delivering the care day in, day out, they are calling for this pay rise and you're saying you won't support it.
Adam, you've made your point. Claire Fox.
Adam, just even to reply to that quick point, there's an awful lot of workers in Wales who don't work in the NHS and an awful lot of them wouldn't want a pay rise. An awful lot of them would want to have some pay and some guaranteed employment.
You know, one of the dangers with this, and I do get anxious about it, is that we've somehow isolated health workers, nurses in particular as a special kind of worker. Now nobody…of course we all understand that they've been on the front line in this pandemic but it's just that to say that they require a special award as distinct from, for example, care workers or as distinct from people who work in the supermarkets, as distinct from all the people who've been cycling around delivering meals to people who rather enjoyed working from home, whereas those people have carried on, what about the people who clean the streets, what about the people who pick up the bins? There's a whole range of people who deserve a pay rise, and it's also the case that for millions of people, they haven't even been able to avail themselves of furlough, you know, people who run their own businesses, are freelancers and so on, have been absolutely destitute and forgotten in the whole of this.
So what I think we need to do, because I do think there does end up being this thing about saying I want to say and associate myself with the nurses because that will show how virtuous I am, you isolate them as a special group, but it's quite divisive. And so I would be looking of course at how we can get the economy started again as quickly as possible, with less of the caution as exhibited by the politicians here, and then make sure that everybody and anybody that we can is rewarded successfully. But so many people are facing unemployment, so many people are facing wage cuts, to just say it's only the nurses that we should consider, I mean, remember the furloughed staff have basically had a 20 per cent pay cut and lots of them are going to face losing their job and according to the politicians in Wales, if you work in tourism, you can forget it, you're not going to have a job. What about them?
Vaughan, Scotland's rather outmanoeuvred you, hasn't it? I mean, it's been very hard for you to say…I know you might be worth four per cent in Scotland but you're not worth four per cent in Wales?
No, I don't think so, and actually this isn't about manoeuvring, that's the problem. If people's pay is just a manoeuvre, that's the wrong lens to look at it.
What, you think there's not an element of politics in it?
Well, there's always politics and lots of choices, but that isn't the way we're approaching pay and I actually do think that our frontline health and care workers are a special case. I've already decided to give for basic rate taxpayers a £500 special payment across health and social care, and the reason they're different is they have put themselves in harm's way for us.
But what about a four per cent pay rise?
They have put themselves in that position, that's why I've made that choice. I've also made clear that we're going to wait for the pay review body recommendations, I made really clear that I'm not setting an arbitrary cap.
So I know Andrew is bravely talking about that he wouldn't have a one per cent pay cap here in Wales, but the reality is he supported austerity for ten years, and if actually the Treasury are only going to fund one per cent, that's got real consequences not just for health and social care workers but actually for wider public finances and our ability to support businesses as well. So there's quite a lot to this but I'm really clear about where we are, we've got a good track record in recruiting and retaining staff in Wales, in the last four years our NHS headcount has risen by £10,000 so we've put our money where our mouth is and we do have more staff. I'll need more of those staff to take care of you and me in the future as well.
Andrew?
Hi, Fiona. I'd just like to say the NHS have been responsible for saving many lives and been a foundation for getting this country back on their feet, so I think we definitely should be matching four per cent, even more. I think this government's found money for everything else, why not find the money for these people on the front line?
Alan?
As somebody who has experienced the NHS in Wales who helped my son before COVID, I'd just like to say they deserve a lot more than what this country is giving them at the present. Clapping them and just saying that they're great, they deserve a lot more for what they actually do.
And do you think they should be made a special case? Claire's making the point that they shouldn't.
I'm a limited company director myself who's received no help from the government whatsoever but I would treat them as a special case because they helped my son when he needed it.
Okay, Nigel.
Yes, I think we mustn't forget as well the other people who are on the front line, who've put their lives at risk, who've spent time away from family and loved ones to look after and make sure that we can get on as much as we possibly can with our lives during these difficult times.
But there is no doubt whatsoever that the National Health is a wonderful, wonderful service, and the people who work there are wonderful, wonderful people who have put their own lives at risk in order to save other lives and if that means they are special cases and deserve a four per cent, whatever the percentage is, then of course they should deserve it, you know? Every single one of us pretty much was out on a Thursday night clapping and applauding them. We must never ever forget the great work that they've done. They saved my life 20 years ago and I shall forever be in debt because they go far and beyond what they really need to be doing, and the other people as well in the country we must remember, volunteers even who have given up time in helping others, caring about the neighbours, checking on people, going to get things for people who can't go and get things for themselves, we must not forget the other people as well.
Let's take another question from Lyn Jones.
Okay, my question is in the forthcoming May elections, 16 and 17-year-olds can vote for the first time. Now which political party will that benefit?
Which political party will that benefit the most? Claire?
I don't know who it will benefit and I've got very mixed views about the lowering of the age of voting to 16 and 17. I've been concerned following Welsh politics for many years at the low turnout in elections and the lack of political engagement which it is a bit dispiriting apart from of course in the referendum about whether we should leave the EU, which there was a high turnout and we know which way Wales voted. But the 16 and 17-year-old vote always feels a little bit cynical, you know?
We can't engage everybody who's 18 plus, so what we'll do is we'll get lots of young people involved and there is, and there has always been a little bit of the idea that those young people, and I work with teenagers so I know how smart they can be, but also for the purposes of everything else, they're treated as not being adults. They're still at school, they're dependent and they're consequently not seen as autonomous in the usual way that we understand that politically.
Well, we've got two young people in our audience who've got their hands up. Tim, let's start with you. Are you more likely to vote Labour? Do you think this is a good idea?
I'd always say increasing suffrage is always a good idea. As a democracy we want to get as many people heard as possible. My suspicion would be that by reducing the age, the populous might be more likely to vote on populist ideas, so I wonder if that would actually benefit parties such as Plaid in the Senedd elections more than Labour, because, as we've seen recently, Labour is in record lows in polls.
Katie? Or Kate, sorry?
Yes, I think the thing with 16 and 17-year-olds is I think we just don't give them enough credit and I think that, like, I'm 27, I've only really spent the last few years learning about all of this. When I was 16, I didn't take an interest, but I know, like, the 16, 17, 18-year-olds that I work with who know more than I ever knew at that age, and I think that it's their future more than it's my future, more than it's the next future, do you know what I mean? And I think they have every right to have a say in that as an 18-year-old would.
And which party do you think will it benefit the most, that's the question?
I do think that it would probably…I get the vibe that it would probably help Plaid or the Green Party or someone more like that, at the moment.
You supported this, Adam, reducing the vote to 16, is that because you thought you'd get more votes that way?
No, I think…
Really?
No, I think Tim's right, I mean, we all benefit by having our young people right at the heart of a democracy, we all gain, and I think that the party that will benefit the most is the one that presents the most inspiring vision of the future and that's up to all of us in the next few weeks. Now I hope that it will be our party, but, you know, none of us should take young people for granted, and ultimately I think there is interestingly a very clear pattern, though, isn't there, that independence has the highest support amongst 16 to 24 years old, and I don't think that's any accident, you know?
It's a very… The independence movement in Wales is driven by positivity, hope. It's actually about looking forward to the future, it's actually looking out to the world as well, and I think that's a message that really appeals to young people thinking about the Wales that we're going to build, you know? Coming out of this pandemic, we're all thinking, aren't we, we don't want to go back to the way that Wales was. What kind of world and what kind of Wales do we want to build, and that's really at the heart of the independence message. It's why it's appealing to young people, and obviously Plaid Cymru are the only major party that is offering an independence referendum, and I think that's going to be a major factor, not just for young people in this election, of course, because 39 per cent of the Welsh population support independence.
And presumably, Andrew, you don't think that the Conservatives are going to benefit from 16 to 17-year-olds voting because you called it a stitch-up by the left wing political establishment?
Well, ultimately we deal with the franchise we've got on the election but…
But this is not a franchise you wanted.
Well, I didn't believe in votes at 16 to 17, I voted to keep it at 18, because I believe that was a sensible age to bring the franchise in and the voters to vote at that age.
So is it going to be a bit tricky for you to appeal to them now?
No, I'd hope not. We have an exciting and forward-looking manifesto. I don't think people would want constitutional carnage on an independence referendum we'll have, I don't think they want their government focus…
Says the man who was an ardent Brexiteer.
Well, that was part of the manifesto and people voted for it, but what I'm saying to you is that people at this election will look at the manifestos and think do we need more constitutional chaos by having an independence referendum or do we come out positively from the COVID crisis, deal with the environmental challenges that we've got as well and the franchise will be the franchise. The point that Claire made is that all of us as politicians from the Assembly and wider society need to work to get better engagement across the whole of Wales, because regrettably only about 40, 45 per cent of the electorate engage with the Assembly elections as opposed to the general election in Wales which is 70, 75 per cent, so there is a big turnoff when it comes to Welsh Parliamentary elections, regrettably.
Is it a turnoff for you, Kay? You've got your hand up.
I'd just like to say that I think the young people are our future and I sincerely hope that whatever government and the young people choose that they are going to be determined to put mental health and wellbeing as an investment at the forefront of services, because our young people have suffered during this pandemic and there is a crisis in mental health services.
I've recently tragically lost my own sister to a gaping hole in services and I think in Wales whatever, and the young people who are at the heart of decisions, that we should be building services around those people to support us, because they will be ultimately the carers and the engineers and they will be the builders of the future, and the NHS staff, and whoever the young people pick, I hope that they can see that they are deserving of a government that the framework is built for their wellbeing, that's physical and mental health, you know? And I sincerely hope that that is taken seriously by all parties.
Ian?
Yes, I think the answer to the question is which party is most vocal about introducing it, because they've obviously done their research and they would know who is likely to vote for Labour, Conservative or Plaid so you've answered the question for yourself, really, that's what I think.
So that's why you introduced it, Vaughan, that's why you backed it because you thought you'd get more votes that way?
No, I've been…
Not in terms of increasing universal suffrage, as Tim put it, but just to get more votes.
I've been a supporter of votes at 16 long before I was elected to the council, when I was a councillor for one term before I was a member of the Senedd, so I think it's the right thing to do from a principle point of view, I think that at the age of 16 there are lots of responsibilities that we impose on people at that age, and I think people have the right to choose who will make decisions on their behalf. Talking about young people being the carers and the engineers of the future, of course young people can already work.
Many young people are already carers for people in their family and we definitely will have something to say about mental health and wellbeing in our manifesto, not just physical health too. And I don't think you can guarantee it's one party or another who will benefit, because, you know, we're asking to take Wales forward and I think we will have more people…
You can't guarantee it but you can see from evidence that's gone through elections before that generally younger people tend to favour Labour and independence parties.
But only generally and actually there have been lots of times in this election where seats will be decided by small margins and we're in an extraordinary period of time, there's been a much greater profile for devolutions through the last year and a bit, and I think a greater awareness of the powers that we have within the Welsh Parliament, the responsibilities we have, and I think, and I certainly hope that more people will cast a ballot in this election because of that, because you can see just how important it is to choose a government here in Wales on our side to make choices because the pandemic isn't over, we then have a huge task to rebuild the country and make it a fairer country for the future. I think everyone of every age, not just 16 and 17, but over 16s and everyone around that as well has a real stake in deciding the future of Wales, and I hope everyone regardless of their view goes out and makes a choice for who will be the next Welsh Government.
Rhian?
Hi, yes, I don't think we give young people enough credit. I'm a secondary school teacher and I had an A-level class this morning and a lot of the discussion I feel was a lot more informative and helpful to each other. They listened to each other. We don't give them enough credit and I would say that they are young adults rather than children, 16 and 17-year-olds, they've got a lot to say, and they are differing opinions, and I think they should have that opportunity to vote. And if they don't want to use that vote then they don't have to but I think the option should be there.
So, Nigel, the question is in the forthcoming May elections, which political party will benefit the most from 16 and 17-year-olds being able to vote?
The honest answer to you, Fiona, I don't know.
I just hope that all the leaders of all the parties will be very honest and upfront in their policies, honest and upfront with young people who at 16 and 17 years of age can be heavily influenced at that age. Fifty is the new 40, I think 16 is the new 18, times have changed, you have the influence of social media and stuff as well on young people. There are a huge amount of very, very sensible mature 16 and 17-year-olds out there, and politics should be for all. All of us should have a say in our own country and the future of our country, at 16, 17 years of age as well, as well as 18 and upwards.
So, you know, young people are much more intelligent than we give them credit, there are good decent young people out there, and I'm glad to hear that they have the opportunity now to play a part in what is the future is then the young people themselves.
We've got time to squeeze one more question in from Sarah Wingfield. Sarah?
Hello, thank you, Fiona. There's a new proposal to mandate the flying of the Union Jack on all government buildings across the United Kingdom daily, excluding Northern Ireland. Is this likely to unite the nations as presumably intended, or might our flags become politicised?
Is this a good idea, Andrew?
I think it is, but I think in Wales obviously we have our own flag and we fly that with the Union flag because we're part of the United Kingdom, an important part of the United Kingdom.
But over the UK government buildings?
Well, the two flags fly proudly over the Welsh Office in Cardiff, the new Welsh Office that's just been built and so it should be mandated that both flags fly in Wales because we are a proud country on our own but also part of the United Kingdom so…
Why do you think this decision has been taken now?
Well, I think that question is probably directed at the Westminster government but ultimately they've taken the decision to obviously to fly that flag in England and across the United Kingdom because it unifies the whole country, it's an important symbol of unity in the United Kingdom, and I think it's an important recognition of the importance of a flag to a country's identity, and I'm proud to call myself a unionist but I'm equally proud to be a Welshman as well, a passionate Welshman who puts 19.5 stone on the veteran's rugby field every now and again.
You're laughing at that idea, not at the 19.5 stone, I hasten to add, but the idea of it being…
I was laughing at that as well.
…of flying the Union Jack.
Look, it's an attempt to be…part of this attempt to have culture…I think there's a danger you get too upset about this when actually we already have the Welsh flag and the Union Jack flying over the Welsh Government building. I'm proud to be Welsh and British and proud of my Zambian heritage as well, but I actually think that for politicians it's not so much having a row about flags but about the future of the country.
You know, if we fly the flag over all local council buildings or not, we'll have a row about it, but will it change anybody's life? I don't think it will.
But the Labour leader said…
I'm much more interested in what we get to do to transform people's lives, to build our country for the better in the future.
But the First Minister said this month the UK is over and a new union should be crafted, so is that why you don't welcome the Union Jack?
No, like I said, I'm proud to be Welsh and British and I'm proud of my Zambian heritage.
We have the flag flying over Welsh Government buildings, the Union Jack, and we have the Welsh flag as well. There isn't a contradiction in that, and Mark Drakeford's comments aren't about the flag, they're about how the UK works, recognising that power is held in different parts of the UK, and just having a UK government making all the choices when people don't agree with each other isn't the right way forward. It's about remaking the union, it's a voluntary association of the four nations, I think we're all better off, the four countries of the UK together, but we need to have a way for the union to work in the future. Otherwise the danger is we'll end up dividing the UK and we'll see it fall apart. Now that isn't what I want to see, but obviously Wales need to be able to make our own decisions in a whole range of areas that already here in the Welsh Parliament, and that's what people are going to vote on at the start of May.
Sarah, you asked this question, what's your view?
Whilst I understand the intention of seeking unity through using the Union Jack for the UK in the whole, I think there's a risk of anything which is forced can sometimes have a corresponding resistance, which could undermine the original intention. I think there's a better way to maybe win hearts and minds. There's a risk that flags can become tokenistic rather than the celebration of nationhood and perhaps a sense of belonging. I just think there's a danger of the Union Jack being…which, you know, should symbolise unity, kind of becoming a political football, so…
Claire?
I've never been much of a flag waver, but when I was in Brussels as an MEP, the officials came round and snatched all the little mini Union Jacks that were in front of the Brexit Party MEPs and confiscated them, said they weren't allowed, and said that you shouldn't have symbols of nationalism, and I was surrounded in a European Parliament with the European flag everywhere we looked and everyone had mini European flags, the blue with the stars, so it made me realise that flags do symbolise something, because that was actually an assault on national sovereignty, not on the flag.
But I do think Sarah's right, you know? You can't mandate a union by simply imposing the flag on it. I however do worry about the Welsh Labour in particular flirting with Welsh nationalism, accommodating to it in a way that I found very unhelpful recently and not winning the arguments for the United Kingdom, and I do think that the union does count for something democratically.
Adam, we haven't got an awful lot of time left, so if you be reasonably brief…
This has obviously been designed really in part as a response to the growing support for Scottish and Welsh independence. It might have the opposite effect in Wales because I mean there is no more potent symbol of Wales' invisibility within this union than the Union Jack, because we're the only home nation that isn't represented on it, and therein lies a deep truth about how we are treated as a nation within this unequal United Kingdom
But you're not represented on it because Wales and England were part of the same country at that point.
Yes, and the union that we didn't get the vote on, by the way, but therein lies the experience I think of Wales. We saw it with the furlough, didn't we, , the Welsh Government asked for the furlough to be extended, we were refused, endangering our lives, when the situation changed in England, hey presto, they extended the furlough, and the people of Wales noticed that, and that's how Wales has been treated in this United Kingdom and it's there to see on the flag itself.
Nigel.
When you referee out in Italy and Rome, they have the Italian flag, whoever they're playing against and then in the middle always on the stadium they put up the match flag of the referee, and the Welsh flag, the Welsh dragon was always hanging there when I was refereeing and I was so proud looking up at that. I don't think you should mandate the flag on anybody. You have to understand that within Wales, there are people who want to fly the Union Jack, there are people who are proud to be British, there are other people who don't feel proud to be British, and I think it's wrong to mandate the flag on people. I think it should be individual choice.
Or even on UK government buildings?
Well, if it's a government building then it's the policy of that government or the people within that building should have the right to choose, so I wouldn't be too much hung up about the Union Jack flying or not on a government building because, you know, if you force issues on people, then you're going to have people rebel against it, and I'm very proud to see the Welsh flag flying wherever it flies.