Good evening. Welcome to my guests in the studio, Rosemary, welcome to you down the line, and our audience, familiar faces by now. Of course welcome to you at home as well. Thank you very much for watching the programme. Join in the usual way on social media@BBCQuestion Time. The first question tonight is from PS.
Should care workers be forced to have COVID vaccinations in order to do their jobs and should NHS workers be the next group to be forced.
I'm going to ask you because you are a surgeon in the NHS. You've had your vassal, you told us that before. What do you think about the idea of making it compulsory.
I'm quite against it, to be honest. It should be a different strategy. I think people should be encouraged to have vaccinations. Like many people from the BMA community I have a vaccine hesitancy in order to overcome to have the vaccine, to be fair, to be convinced about it, I had to think about it quite a lot. That's as someone who is in the NHS. I think if you look at, you know, over 20% of NHS workers come from BAME communities. If you try to mandate these things you will have people who are vaccine-hesitant become vaccine -- so I think you make the problem worse.
I've never really thought the answer of trying to convince someone to do something is by forcing them to do it. It is better to give them a carrot than to beat them over the head with a stick. I think it should be a different approach.
We are not forcing people to have a vaccine we are saying in order to be a frontline care worker you would have to be vaccinated. Not quite the same thing --
It means you get the vaccine or lose your job.
It is people being driven out of care where we already have a problem. We need to understand issues about why people are hesitant to take a vaccine, particularly those in the care sector. They want to look after people and look after those in the care homes --
We have been vaccinating care workers for six months now.
There are issues for some people. We have vaccinated a high percentage but there are still those who are hesitate talent. the strategy that is going to be most successful. But I do also understand why ministers are worried that you would have people in those settings. But also I think you can look at other strategies around testing. The other thing I raised in Parliament yesterday was the issue about people in domiciliary care. At the moment we talked about people in a care home but there are millions across the country who have someone coming into their own home and going to other people's homes. The government is going to consult on that. So I think this is very mixed and I have -- I'm in two minds about what the right answer is, actually.
Rosemary.
I have a young daughter with downs syndrome who is clinically vulnerable in general. I know it is very difficult to compel anyone to do anything but I do feel my daughter, in the situation she lives in, as part of their job, the people who support her to live should be vaccinated. I think it is part of the job and it needs to happen now, I'm afraid.
I guess it comes down to who is right to take priority. Is it the person like Rosemary's daughter who is not choosing to be looked after or the people who take the job.
It has to be the people who are looked after. You put your finger on why I do reluctantly support this. I don't think it is unreasonable to expect care workers to exceed to some medical requirements.
Even if it makes -- given there's a shortage of care workers at the moment, even if it increases the numbers who quit.
I have two problems, the number of people who do it. The second thing the government has to ensure is those people have alternative work. There's talk about giving them alternative jobs but -- it was interesting the point made about ethnic minorities having reservations.
It has to be the people who are looked after. You put your finger on why I do reluctantly support this. I don't think it is unreasonable to expect care workers to exceed to some medical requirements.
Even if it makes -- given there's a shortage of care workers at the moment, even if it increases the numbers who quit.
I have two problems, the number of people who do it. The second thing the government has to ensure is those people have alternative work. There's talk about giving them alternative jobs but -- it was interesting the point made about ethnic minorities having reservations.
The government has to be understanding about that but ultimately, when you are choosing between whether it is the member of staff or the people who are being cared for that take priority, I think it does have to be focused around the people being cared for. You do have to make a priority choice, and that would be mine. But it is very difficult.
Sean, you have your hands up.
Good evening. I find it appalling that we're saying to these NHS workers, who have been applauded, are wonderful, have risked their lives, I have a family member who is an NHS worker. She is not refusing the vaccine, she has had it on three separate occasions but has been turned away because she has a history of anaphylactic shock. Where does that leaves her?
At the moment it applies only to care workers, the government is going to look at NHS workers. If people can't medically have it, there can't be a --
It is widely reported it is going to move to the NHS. It is a disgrace. We're going to say to care workers and potentially NHS workers, unless you pump your body full of a chemical -- let's be honest, that's what it is. -- I've had both my vaccines, I'm not hesitant, but there's something wrong where we tell people unless they pump their body full of a chemical, they are out of their job. I think it is appalling.
Colette?
I think I resonate a lot of what was said there. It concerns me that 20% of our NHS and care workers are from the BAME community. The structure should have been to gain trust, work with the communities to get the vaccine rates up before we start forcing mandatory policy on them. We already have a massive shortage of staff in those areas. What does that mean? Can I do it in my employment? We have to tread carefully with this. We have a potential to lose a lot of very good people.
Dave.
Thanks, Fiona. Yeah, ethically it is a very, very difficult one to try to sort out. One of the things I'm personally feeling is how and why do we feel the need to actually force people and almost twist their hands behind their back in saying if you don't get it you haven't got a job? That is ethically wrong. You know, where do we stop? Do we go to the police service? Do we go to the fire service? Do we go to the ambulance service? I work with elderly people as well within the outdoor sector. Will I have -- yes, I've had the vaccine, I've had both, I'm very fortunate. But where do we stop with this. That's what's ethically wrong aspect of it.
What is the Labour position on this?
Obviously this was announced today, there is going to be a consultation on going wider to the NHS. I think the starting point with this issue isn't whose rights are more important but what will get the outcome which we want, which is that everybody gets vaccinated, everybody is protected. I think from that starting point there is something to be positive about, which is that this country is one of the most vaccinated countries in the world. We are incredibly successful in terms of persuading, educating --
Sure. If your morality was in a care home, by definition most of the elderly in care homes are vulnerable, would you be for her to looked after by care workers who have not been vaccinated?
The problem is twofold. There's a shortfall in care workers at the moment and we risk putting vulnerable people in a worse situation if they don't have care from people who are leaving the system. The other problem is those who are vaccine-hesitant have strong views that they feel strongly, are not necessarily going to be affected by the government telling them they have to have a vaccine. So I'm not convinced and the Labour Party is not convinced that this will work. We need to look at places like Wales where they have a higher level of vaccination amongst workers, where it is about education, it is about making sure people can take time off work if they need to, that they are confident that they can take time off work if they are poorly after they had the vaccine, and it is about informing and enabling people to get the outcome. But the outcome must be that everybody gets the vaccination. That's what we're aiming for. I'm not sure this is the way to do it.
If I could try to persuade Sean. The thing about this is people are working in environments without being vaccinated and that's also an ethical problem for the eventual vulnerable people. So there are two ethical problems and you're trying to balance them against each other. I think it is shameful to think it is a simple question but it isn't. I take a different balance to you.
When it comes to the different numbers of care workers vaccinated, Scotland has done particularly well on this.
I think issues of consent are really important. Issues of leadership are important, and also trust. I was looking at the figures today from Scotland. We're at 100 percent of care workers have had the vaccine, so we don't face this issue. I think, you know --
Why do you think that is? I'm not asking you to blow the government's trumpet here, but sensibly why do you think Scotland has succeeded there? In London, for example, just 23 percent of care homes have reached the target, four-fifths of staff.
What you have in Scotland is a government at large which is trusted. One of the key factors over the course of the last 15 months has been the first minister, almost on a daily basis giving a press conference, giving information to the public as to what is going on, what is expected of people, giving guidance rather than putting things in statute where appropriate. Bringing people with us. We all talked about the success of the vaccine programme --
At a local level presumably things have been done differently.
The point is we have communicated fairly with the public and the public in the main have come with us on that journey. A difficult journey for so many people.
I applaud our care workers, our frontline works for everything they have done and the fact that so many in the care community have taken the vaccine so we don't face this problem. I do think -- when you look at everything that has happened over the last while, the fact the unlocking has been put back a few weeks. You have a government in London that continual overpropositions, you end up in a situation it hasn't been able to win the war on this and convince people the way it should have done they need to be vaccinated. That's the difference.
Sean, do you want to come back in?
I just obviously wanted the right to reply to the gentleman. You know, I don't need telling how, you know, how important it is for vulnerable people. I am one of those vulnerable people. I had sepsis in the first part of the pandemic. The point I'm making to tell people that unless they have chemicals, and let's be honest, I'm not anti-vaccine, that's what it is in it's simple left form, or they are going to lose their jobs, that is appalling. We have been told to clap these people, now we're telling them they're not going to have a job. Are you going to say visitors to care homes and hospitals have to be vaccinated? You know?
Just to be clear, the moment the government is talking about an and people who could have the vaccine for medical reasons. They are not talking about visitors. None of this is clear yet. But other workers, workers, won't you tingles, yes, they would be expected to be vaccinated.
I'm going on to another question. Nicola.
Should we be delaying Freedom Day for another four weeks?
I'm going to come to you because I imagine you have fairly strong views in terms of this in the world of entertainment and theatre in particular.
Yes, and thank you for the question. Pre-pandemic in a year 34 million people go to live theatre, more than go to see premiership football matches. So these 24 months have been unimaginable for our industry. It is live, it is about the experience of all being together, sharing an experience. And the news earlier this week was devastating because it was contradictory to what we had been led to believe and, of course, theatres and productions can't just be rustled up overnight or in a week. It takes months to line up a major production which can be employing more than 100 people on a single show, to line that up, to have it ready for a specific date is really, really tough and it needs time.
Rosemary, given the infection rate has been rising here, do you have any sympathy with the idea it is best to delay for four weeks to try to stop another wave?
It is contradictory, what's happening at the moment. None of the pilots that were held in theatre, the Crucible Theatre, the date does not show that transmission increases whether a theatre is 25%, 50% or 100% just to give you an example it is trading in London at 70 percent, in the regions, where I am in Cornwall, there are no theatres open at the moment. It is down to 4 or 5% regionally. This is people's businesses, their jobs, their livlihoods. So many people, freelancers have not been eligible for the furlough. It has been a nightmare, 16 months. The sooner we can get back, the better. There's no evidence to say performing in a theatre, where you all look forwards, you don't necessarily talk to anyone apart from the person in your bubble who is sitting next to you. We need to get on and get back. What we need is certainty around a date. So we have to stick to this July date. And if we can't stick to that July date, what we need is an industry, and we are a huge industry.
Let me bring in the rest of the Panel. Rosemary. Forgive me. Sarah, Labour supports the idea of delaying for four weeks.
I'm enormously sympathetic.
But not persuaded.
No, the fact we have the highest infection rates in Europe, which is a league table we didn't want to top again, means we have to lock down, unfortunately. There's only one reason we are delaying this roadmap, it is the Delta variant, and there's only one reason it is as rampant as it is across the UK and that's because this government was too slow to close the borders. It is absolutely clear one has caused the other. What the government needs to do now is to put in place, alongside the public health measures, an economic support measure as well. So your case in point about theatres but, you know, I was talking to a pub-owner in my constituency yesterday who has just cancelled all the live music she planned for July. All of those musicians devastated. They will get no support. We have to extend furlough, business rates relief, we have to sort out proper payment for isolation. It is horrific, the news we had today that the government was trying to hide information about how people could self-isolate and we have to look at how people are going to pay back some of these loans as well.
People have a lot of debt they're building up. The restaurants that don't have outside space can only have a third capacity. They are running at a loss. But this government didn't lock down, didn't do what we told them to do from January, February, the start of this year. So we have our wonderful vaccination programme; on the other hand we are throwing it all away by not securing our borders. It is bad policy from this government and they need to make sure it is not people really struggling that end up suffering.
Mark, you led the Commons rebellion against this unlocking for another four weeks. When you were on the programme last in April, you wanted to unlock them, in February.
No, in February --
You were on in February, you wanted to unlock in April. Given what's happened with the Delta variant do you think we would be in a worse place now?
Going directly to Nicola's question, should we have delayed getting back to normal for another four weeks, no, I don't think we should. We have now offered a second dose of vaccine to all of the top nine groups, the groups that accounted for 99% of death over 85% of vaccinations.
More people would die.
The problem is this problem is going to be with us forever. The scientific officer said that. If we are being honest with people, vaccines are not 100 percent perfect. If you want to wait for a 100 percent perfect vaccine, you'll be waiting forever. The fact is at some point we have to get back to normal. I'm afraid, the brutal truth is some people will get COVID even if they have been vaccinated, and of those people some people will become ill. I'm afraid some people will die.
Far fewer if more people are vaccinated.
Of course. In the same way we get 15,000 people die of seasonal flew.
You were saying that November.
The difference is we have a successful vaccine. The only piece of information that we learned this week that we didn't know when we were going to unlock on 21 June is that the vaccines are fantastically successful, including against the delta variant. My worry is this, if you look at what the government set out yesterday and what we were voting on, the four-week delay is to collect data to make another decision and test. It is not a guaranteed end date at all. The problem is 96 percent of people already had two doses in those risk groups.
Not the over 50s.
Some people haven't had it. The first dose about transmission, if you read what the government said yesterday, we're not going to vaccinate these younger people until August because there's a supply issue. My worry is the week before 19 July we're going to see the same scientists being wheeled out, the ones on the stage, but all speak in a personal capacity. There's going to be a drum beat again and, once again, it is going to be put off. Worse, in the winter -- and there are government internal documents talking about the autumn and winter and the pressure on the NHS, we're going to see the pressure to introduce restrictions and do this all over again. It will destroy businesses and confidence across the country. At some point we have got to learn to live with this virus, uncomfortable though it is, I think we should have started that process on 21 June.
Ian, you have been researching through all this.
We had 128,000 deaths. If Mark and his colleagues had got their way then the death rate in this country will increase.
I'm sorry, that's not right.
All we know is if we get people the vaccination, the chance of reducing the hospitalisation and death rate is greater. Nobody wants to see the arts community or any other sector of the economy put into a situation that they can't operate. We all want theatres to open as quickly as possible. We all want people to get back to work. But the fact of the matter is, and Sarah is right, the failure to close the borders. The failure to stop the delta variability taking root -- by the way, the Scottish government sought the powers to do that, we sought the powers to stop people coming in from India, for people to be forced to quarantine, and Westminster wouldn't do it, they wouldn't give people in Scotland, the government to do that. It was the abdication of responsibility by the UK government. But one of the things that's poor in all of this is we have 3 million people in the United Kingdom that have been secluded from financial support for over a year. A lot of them are working in the arts profession. Now there are elements I would applaud of the scheme up until now. It has worked well. It kept people off the unemployment register. But I'm disgraced and outraged that so many have not had a penny of help from this government and people are really struggling. The government has to accept responsibilities for those that are freelancers, those working in the art sector. The final point I will make --
Very briefly.
I do have some concerns, just as Sarah has said, that a lot of businesses are in deep financial difficulties with a debt pile that's increasing. In Scotland we don't have business rates for businesses in the hospitality sector.
Briefly, Ian, I have to let other people in.
The government has to accept its responsibilities.
Let me come to the audience. We really want to hear what you say but if you speak at that length no one else is going to get a word in. Nicola.
It seems to me we have wanted the government to follow the science all along and it seems to me they are doing that this time. Although it is frustrating and we all want to be back to normal, I do think of four weeks of the wonderful vaccination programme means a lot more people are detected. It is an early disease. We don't know the effects of long COVID; if we can prevent them, that is useful.
Carlos?
This ideology coming from the government, the back benches that rebel is tortious at a time when we need to be taught the discipline to be in it together. You know, we all, more or less have common sense and realise that we're going to have to sacrifice another 4 weeks but it is the constant interference from the requirement to do that that is painful.
Charlie, you are shaking your head at that?
It is basically people saying do we have freedom or should we be told what to do. And the Panel tonight, you know everybody seems to be saying something sensible and something stupid. Ian, he should take over the Labour Party as captain in hindsight, going on about the desperate need for support that the businesses that have been delayed a month. Every single person, and it is coming across with us as well, is on one hand saying something then basically contradicting themselves in the next sentence. We don't know, we really don't know. I run an outdoor events business. It is horrible at the moment. However, I understand that it's going to be horrible and I understand that we have to make sacrifices. At the moment, the way the Delta variant is going, yeah, it's not great. We need to be careful.
Daniel.
I heard about Mark saying scientists being wheeled out. Better than wheeling out me.
You are wheeling out somebody who doesn't know when you are wheeling out me. In fact, all of us don't know. The scientists themselves are making estimates but they are doing it on a basis --
Some of them disagree.
But they are doing it on the basis of proper modelling and a lot of medical knowledge. You know, with respect, Mark, in November you urged a course which would have been disastrous, and on a reasonable basis which is we didn't know for certain that things were going to be as bad as the scientists said. I always said we don't know that for certain, it could be worse. Indeed it was.
All that we can do in this situation is try our best to use the best knowledge that we have from the most knowledgeable people and make some sort of estimate about it rather than, as complete amateurs, with no modelling, sticking our oar in to say what we think should happen without any idea whether that's an idea at the expense of people potentially dying. So I rather agree with you. I think that it has been a bit of a disspiriting site and people I respect a lot have, in my view said things that I can't really respect.
Let me come back. All I said in November was I wanted the government to set out a proper set of evidence. You remember the leaked slide about NHS capacity which was leaked out the day before the Prime Minister made the decision. All I ever said was if the government is going to make big, difficult decisions, all we deserve is the honest data, the honest facts to make a decision. In January, when that information was made available, I didn't oppose the current lockdown because I look at the facts and change my mind accordingly.
On the debate I'm not prepared to accept people who disagree with you then be accused of wanting to kill lots of people. This is a balance judgment. The thing we have to do as Member of Parliament is to look at the scientific advice, but also the consequences, the economic impact. You have to balance all those things. On the modelling, interestingly this week we discover after the government made the decision to push this out by four weeks, I think largely based on modelling, funnily enough a new set of models are produced at SAGE with the new vaccine efficacy data which have much lower proposals for how many people might die and a different decision might have been made. Some of us did take the trouble to look at the models in great detail, notice the --
That's correct, but that's what modelling is though.
Some of us looked at the assumptions, you know, and actually, just because I'm not an epidemiolgist doesn't mean I don't know how to look at a model. I tried to make --
Many people when the facts change, change their opinions. The fact is the virus is spreading at at faster rate. As a consequence of that, hospitalisation will increase, deaths will increase.
It's actually slowing down.
Your recipes will never exit --
Let me come back to you, Rosemary. You wanted to come back into the conversation.
The vaccines work, deaths are rising very slightly. What I want to say for my industry is we need to go back to work. It is terrible. There are genuinely people -- this is a world-leading business. We are best in class in the world. Look at Netflix, all the Sky channels, all the television stations, they come from British stage schools, British training, British theatre. We are great at it. Please, let us get back to work. And the Government must support us in our industry.
Just in terms of facts and figures, so many different facts and figures we can bandy around. Hospital admissions have risen by 43%. The numbers are smaller than they were.
They are doubling every 7 to 12 days.
Andy.
What we need to understand here is that even our experts are still learning. The chief scientific officers, chief medical officers, this is a new disease. We are still learning. Because one model was done doesn't necessarily mean that's the only model that's ever going to be right. Things will change, people will learn more, models will change, scientific opinion will change and I'm stunned Mark could tell whether or not a model was correct because I imagine that most scientists in the country, forget chief medical officers, will tell you that models are potentially out of date the minute they are created because there will be more factors.
So let's not get political about this. Let's not start throwing stones at each other. Let's understand that this is new, this is constantly changing. You know, vaccines -- we've all got used to the fact that we're learning about the vaccine. We seem to think that just because we're fed up with COVID it has to go away now. That's not the case. We don't have to sacrifice grandma, we also don't have to lock grandma in the cellar and never let her see the light of day again. What we have to do is support people who can't work, make sure that companies who took money to support a furlough scheme used that money, if they then did some -- whatever, went bankrupt, that that money was then given back to the government. Some of the large corporations, my understanding is had some interesting ways of dealing with governmental funding. We need to get a grip of it. It is not -- it is just not going to go away. Just because we're bored, you can't just say, right, that's it.
Let's take another question from Andrea.
Can we trust the Met Police after an independent panel found them guilty of institutional corruption following the unresolved murder of Andrew Morgan?
Let me remind everyone, Daniel Margen was a private detective, found murdered in a car park in south London, there have been five inquiries, a collapsed trial, no one has been convicted. Then there has been the government commissioned report, as you say, which has talked about institutional corruption within the Metropolitan Police.
Daniel's father lives in my constituency. I've been talking to him, as you imagine. 34 years on from the murder of his father we have some light shone on what's happened. The report is, to be clear, incredibly damning, it really is both of the Home Office, and the Met Police and the whole structure around with, you know, the way that all these inquiries operated. It talks of a form of institutional corruption. I was disappointed this week with the Home Secretary's response. We were in Parliament asking questions. I asked her if she would come back before the summer recess to let us know what she would do about this because she didn't accept any of the findings, she hasn't given a commitment to put in my findings.
The question is can we trust the Met?
I would absolutely support the police and trust the police. They've worked incredibly hard over the last year, they have had a hard time and not much thanks for it.
So when the commissioner says "I do not accept that we are are insti criticisms of her, what do you make of that?
She says she is going to come back with a proper response. For her, she needs to show the leadership that we understand serious mistakes have happened and we need to put it right. My concern looking forward, this has spanned 30 years so it is not just Cressida that has been in charge that whole period, but the Met is a young workforce.
We have a lot of young officers because a lot of people lost their positions and we are recruiting. We have to make sure they have the resilience and support that they don't get involved in anything like this. The inquiry is something like out of The Line Of Duty. So, is everything okay? No, it isn't. Is the answer to say sack this person? No, I don't think it is. We need a proper response. But it needs to be quite far-ranging and they do need to accept what the findings are.
So the report Daniel has talked about institutional corruption. It is not the first time the word "institutional" has been used in relation to the Met.
That was rejected and I think time has proven it was correct. In some ways it is all political crisis for me. I can't answer yes to your question completely. I can't answer 100 percent.
So you can't say yes, I trust the Met Police.
I can't, which for somebody with my politics is very, very difficult. But the nature of this report coming on top of a whole load of other incidents makes it impossible. The response to this report was horrific. If you are being accused on a solid basis of institutional corruption, which was not just withholding help from these inquiries and resisting the inquiry, but also underneath it some quite serious allegations about the conduct itself, which was what was behind it, you know, criminal acts, and to then respond, well, we're not institutionally corrupt, as a sort of flat answer, I just thought that was completely unacceptable as an institution.
I hate to be in a position, because we all rely on the police force in our daily lives for maintenance of law, the rule of law, and nothing is more important to me than the rule of law. So not to be able to say yes is a total political tragedy did I for me, but I can't.
Jo, what about you?
With these sorts of things there's a lot of mistrust in the police. The Fresh Water Five, for example, can't go to retrial. I think these things need to be addressed properly. We have a society that won't address the issues front and centre or, indeed, The House, it's a very sad day. I think that just demonstrate the lack of respect for the trust the British public should have in police forces, not just the Met Police. Has anybody considered the thoughts and feelings of this man's family? Has anybody thought about that? Five investigations, five investigations that have been failed. It's disgraceful.
The family has sate almost every step we found ourselves lied to, f off, bullied degraded and let down time and time and time again. Jack.
Thank you. I think there are -- it's worth noting there are countless communities and groups that aren't just losing faith in the police or in other institutions because of this right now but over years and years have.
But I think, you know, Daniel touched on something important here, there seems to be almost a pattern in behaviour of our larger institutions of feeling insulted, perhaps, being called "institutionally" something rather than taking the responsibility to get better. I would love an inquiry that led to a learning exercise rather than just another PR damage control exercise.
Sherrie?
Isn't it mad to assume that the Met Police in general are corrupt? Surely, certain parts of the police are corrupt. You have certain people who are corrupt, it is hard to believe they are corrupt, but they are there. It's not the police in general, just a few bad apples within it.
I just want to come to you, Ian. This report is about the Met and makes it clear it is only talking about the Met. Talking to you in terms of the SNP in Scotland, a review found worrying evidence of treatment of black minority officers.
The police need to take responsibility for what's happened here. You have to feel for the family, 34 years of being lied to before you get to the truth. It's not acceptable. Cressida Dick, as the Commissioner, has to accept responsibility as the presiding officers of the police service in London for that. I agree, Fiona, if we end up in a situation, whether in London, Scotland or elsewhere, that people don't have trust in our police force.
As the gentleman just said, the vast majority, the vast, vast majority of our police force are decent people trying to conduct a public service. I want to applaud them for what they do day in, day out. But we can't walk away from this.
In terms of police Scotland, attitudes haven't changed as much as they should have since 1999, what can you do as the Scottish government to change that.
Of course this needs to be addressed in the Scottish Parliament when it relates to Scotland, as far as Westminster is concerned, we have the Select Committee, they have an important role to play in this. We need to make sure as politicians that we are doing everything that we can to ensure that the public can feel safe, that they can trusted the police force. But it is not just these issues. We have had the long-running saga over Hillsborough. It holds us all back. We have to make sure that collectively we work with the police force, wherever it is, to deal with these situations and rebuild the public trust and confidence. It is too important that we do that. And we have to do it on a consensual basis.
The question is can we trust the police.
I think one thing you do as a Member of Parliament you do engage a lot with the police in, like a normal way where you are not either having suffered some traumatic event or been caught by them or whatever. You gain with them a lot.
It is interesting that your answer to that question is not yes. You are equivocating.
If you look at the report it highlights a lot of problems. Where I was coming to, most police officers I have ever met are trying to do the right thing. They are trying to protect people and they are trying to support the community. I'm sure the vast majority of officers in the Met are trying to do that. But you can't ignore a report that highlights serious problems. I was a Home Office minister which Teresa May set up this independent inquiry with reputable people on the Panel. It is a serious job of work they have done. What I'm a bit disappointed about is if you ahead up the institution and get a report like this, which is damning, you don't have to necessarily in the end accept all of it but you ought to have taken the trouble to ask yourself tough questions because there are clearly some issues. Just saying, yeah, it's all fine, which would be the implications of saying -- if I said there's no issue, I completely trust everybody in the Met, there's no problem with the institution at all, that would be running consider to that report.
Or have they evolved since then.
We had a number of issues with this. I just think that the institution and the Commissioner need to take this away, have a proper look at it, and come back with a more thoughtful response. There may be areas they disagree with it; if they do she should set out the reasons properly, but grab some of the recommendations, show they are taking it seriously. Ultimately, what you want to get to is that Daniel's family and others in a similar position, look at it and say, they're serious about getting it on a track to get it to be better.
Rosemary.
Daniel's family, 34 years, the resilience of going through those multiple inquiries. Respect to the family, what a terrible thing to have happened. I have a great deal of faith in Cressida Dick that she will take this seriously. I had a lot of dealings with her. I took over as president of our Trade Association in London on 7/7, on the day of 7/7. So in the immediate aftermath, that night was the first night that London theatre closed down before the pandemic since World War II. We did close that night and I had a lot of dealings with Cressida then and subsequently.
It is like an episode of Line of Duty, all these shadowy dealings in smoke-filled cars and pubs, it is extraordinary reading. What we are missing is the wonderful Vicky McClure. Cressida is a remarkable woman to have made the top job in the Met Police. Her achievements. If that organisation is institutionally corrupt, deem that it was, at least at that time, institutionally sexist and at the time Cressida rows to the top, I know she will be taking this very seriously and will come back properly with a full response.
We're going to take another question from Sue Lewis.
Thank you. Does the Australian trade deal set a terrible precedent and threaten the long-term viability of British farming?
Ian, you've been talking about this in the House of Commons.
I have to say I'm deeply worried what this means for farming and indeed for crofters as well. We shouldn't just be thinking about the Australian deal because this is the first trade deal the UK has done of this kind and could open the door for similar deals with Argentina, Brazil, the US, and with Canada as well.
Presumably you welcome the drop of the tariff on Scottish whisky.
We created a set of circumstances where our farming industry is going to be imperiled. We literally sold the farm. Have you a situation where the Australians are talking about the potential to sell $1.3 billion of product to the UK. We're talking about, by the government's own analysis, 0.02 percent. We would need 200 trade --
The 5 percent tariff on Scotch has been scrapped as part of the deal, whisky is 4 billio pounds. Beef farming is worth about a million. You must --
You have of 7,000 people connected with Scottish agriculture in one way or another. We created a situation where as of the beginning of this deal 25,000 tons of lamb can come into the UK. That's three times as much as currently comes in. Within 10 years you'll be talking about 75,000 tons, ten times. You are really talking about -- when you are talking about hill sheep farmers, you are talking about subsistence farming. People are going to be forced out of business.
One of the real ironies of this is the government negotiated a deal where people can go and work in Australia. They are going to be sending people from the UK to Australia to work on farms to put our farmers out of business. That's what this government has done. It is madness on stilts. We have a situation that Brexit was about taking back control. We sold out our fishermen and we are just about to sell out our farmers.
We are finding out details from Dan bra but not finding out details here. Why is that happening.
The government has set out the jut line and it will have to be voted on in Parliament. I think this is a good deal -- it is worth saying that we've just done a deal with the US to deal with tariffs on Scotch whisky which is fantastic news for Scotland, a double win for Scotland. But this is about opening up opportunities for British businesses and British farmers to be able to sell into markets overseas as well.
Trade is a two-way thing. Good trade deals are about a win-win for both sides. This will be a precedent, I hope, to get up into that trans-Pacific deal which will open up big opportunities for British farmers. The price of a lot of these food --
You're talking about industrial farming with worst animal treatment.
Big opportunities for our farmers. Actually Australia is a country, you know, we share a head of state, they're our mates, we have very close security relationship --
Very far geographically.
If you are saying you can't do a trade deal with Australia, you're saying you can't do a trade deal with anyone.
I'll tell a crofter and farmer that had to sell up we have a common head of state. . Will give them comfort.
Rosemary.
I'm not an expert on this but I sit on the UK Trade and Business Commission which is a cross-party initiative to bring together experts to discuss the impact of Brexit. Agriculture and importing are something at the top of the agenda. Just as a layperson it seems clearly counterintuitive, with a government that has a green agenda, that we are going to be trying to ship food from the other side of the world.
I think we are are all aware of the Suez Canal. You can see the pollution from all of the boats held up, the massive ships, the container ships that were held up by the Sues Kabul. So we are going to be using huge amounts of energy to transport the food. We have lots of food we could be importing 100 miles away. I find that completely counterintuitive. I love Australia, I'm delighted about the three years for young people to go and work there. We are just about to of time over there, but farming and agriculture is massive. It's on a massive scale in Australia. I think the largest farm there is something like the size of the state of Israel. It is going to be a tiny, tiny proportion of food that's going to be coming for Australia, yet for us, I think we could find a better solution closer to home. It seems very strange.
We haven't seen the detail yet. On issues like this I look to organisations like the NFU, National Farmers Union. They are concerned in a similar way that Ian and Rosemary have outlined. Very concerned about animal welfare standards the NFU have talked about. I remember being on Question Time a couple of years ago talking about why we can't put some of this stuff into legislation to make sure this doesn't occur. I know farmers are concerned that we'll see products coming into this country and undermining our farmers. It is very -- separating it from the economy, it is very interesting to look at how we as a country take on this kind of new role in global Britain now we are outside the EU, how we use our soft power, our skills, our negotiating skills, our capacity to trade with other countries --
The question is does this set a terrible precedent?
It is a poor deal. It is a very small amount of GDP, 0.02%. But for those farmers which are going to be undercut, which the government said would never happen, is now happening.
I'm not an expert on farming, but I do buy the product. And you have to look at it from both ends, not just the production but also the people who buy it. The reason -- the only reason why it could possibly be a threat to farming in this country is if consumers choose to buy this product rather than the ones being proud here.
Which they may if it is cheaper.
The whole point of trade is somebody swaps something for something else. You can't lose in a trade, that's the whole point of trading. Therefore, my starting position is I like deals which reduce tariffs. It is ridiculous to suggest that this is going to make any difference compared to leaving the single market of the European Union. It won't even achieve even a tiny increase in production that the government is talking about. It will probably be -- it is going to be close to zero, the impact on GDP, but I can't be against it because reducing the costs of goods so that we produce the things we're best at producing, others produce the things they are best at producing, and the consumer gets a good deal on both, has to be a good thing.
The NFU go to great lengths every year to go around the supermarkets to get them to take our products in preference to lamb from elsewhere. There is this issue of cost. If I look at crofters in Skye or elsewhere, in the Highlands, there's no alternative to sheep farming. If we cannot make money from selling sheep, that livelihood, that way of life that has existed for generations comes to an end. You can yourself for what? For the ability to increase 0.2.
There is an opportunity here for us to sell as well.
I'm talking about an industry that is going to be imperiled by the gross stupidity and willful negate your government people.
Why wouldn't people still want to buy them?
I listened to you careful. I have to reflect what you say. It is important. You have experience in that area. But you are suggesting we protect these industries by making everybody pay more for than food. Probably on another Question Time you'll come back and say we've got too much food poverty in this country.
The way that we can drive improvements in living standards is constant increases in trading. So I do understand what you're saying. I think any economic change is difficult and the costs of this are concentrated, the benefits are thinly spread. People do have to think about what you say.
With the animal welfare standards vastly different, that's what should give us concern.
We have very little time but a lot of people asked this next question so we're going to hear it. Colette.
Thank you, Fiona. Good evening, panel. Is Matt Hancock hopeless?
Reading these exchanges were quite extraordinary. I think they probably say more about the Prime Minister than they do about Matt Hancock. That he believes his Health Secretary to be incompetent yet leaves him in charge to our response to a global pandemic. That in itself is shocking. I think the messages speak to the chaos in No. 10, the chaos in government, the lack of ability to get a grip, the fact we were too slow. If I was to pick who I would sack would it be Priti Patel because she broke the ministerial code, Matt for breaking the law? Michael Gove for breaking the law?
Do you agree that Matt Hancock is totally hopeless.
No. When things are stressful, you sometimes say things you don't really mean.
He said it twice.
On the general point, last year when he went to Barnard Castle. I said to the Prime Minister he should resign and if he didn't, the Prime Minister should sack him. If the Prime Minister reflects on that advice he probably wishes he takes it and sacked Dominic Cummings last year.
For all of his great intelligence and ability, I think we are much better off without him in the government. I think it did create chaos. He pointed to a lot of mistakes the government made. We have to learn from those but he pursued a personal vendetta against Matt Hancock.
I think it begs the question of how the pandemic was handled in the early days and it led to the issues we're facing now. I don't know if he is it hopeless or not. I wasn't there. But it sounds chaotic with people flip-flopping.
If the Prime Minister doesn't have confidence in him, why should the rest of us? Cummings should never have been in government but he has shone a light.