So let's start with our first question tonight, which is from Alison Goldie.
Good evening, Fiona, good evening Panel. So given the success of track and trace we rely significantly on the public's trust and the Government and compliance with the rules. Does the Panel feel this has been undermined in any way by the events of this last week?
Gosh! It feels like we have done nothing else but talk about the events of the last week and of course Dominic Cummings. Ian Murray.
Well, thank you for the question, Alison. I think it gets tothe nub of how we get out of pandemic. The way we get out of that is test, track, trace and isolate. That's the only way without a vaccine we were going to be able to go forward. With the saga we have had last week, the Prime Minister and Government, his integrity is in tatters. We have seen it is one rule for the Prime Minister and his team and one rule for the public.
We absolutely need every single member of the public to be absolutely in touch with these rules and abiding by them, otherwise we will never get to the end of this pandemic. I think it should be called track, trace, test, isolate and trust. The Scottish Government also has a big question to answer here in terms of trust, because if you go back to the start of this pandemic, the ground zeroy pandemic in Edinburgh was at a conference in a hotel. The public weren't told about that. The reason that's a difficult story for the Scottish Government is two-fold. One, you need the public to be involved in this so it can be used to help track and trace the people who potentially would have been infected. You need them to have trust in that system.
Given how critical you are of Dominic Cummings, why don't Labour ask for him to go.
Kier Starmer said clearly if he was Prime Minister, he have would have sacked him. When the Conservatives are tearing themselves apart over this kind of issue, there is now over 60 MPs that have publicly said he should go. There are over 70 that have e-mailed back their constituents. We have all had thousands of emails on this. The public are incredibly angry. Douglas Ross said in his letter, and Douglas Ross said in his letter when he resigned this week and I think this is crucial, that many of the public have made huge sacrifices including not being able to hold the hand of loved ones when they are dying. How could he possibly say to his constituents they were wrong and Dominic Cummings was right? I think that sums this issue up in a sentence.
Layla, can I ask you as the scientific voice on our Panel this evening do you feel compliance may have been undermined by the events of the last few days.
Well, it is interesting, isn't it, because it is not exactly about what Dominic Cummings did or didn't do. The question is really about what is the impact of that and what we have heard from our members who are CEOs of hospitals, GPs, all across the health system. People are worried that public health messages are being undermined. They are already hearing that people are making decisions they might not have otherwise made. That's really worrying, because in order for these public measures, whether lockdown, test, track and trace, any of these things to work, we need to have a really clear message that's not open to too much interpretation and discretion and we need to have this public feeling that we are all in it together.
Reasons one of the hospital CEOs said to us recently this this could actually be one of the biggest risks to public health since lockdown began. So I think that all of these are key considerations as we think about what next.
Alison, can I come back to you. Has it had any impact on whether you will be more or less confined as we go into test and protect or test and isolate now.
Well, no, from a personal level I would follow the guidelines. I think I've got enough integrity to do that, but I do think that it will have an impact on some people who are just fed up with the whole idea that someone can get away with something when the rest are not supposed to.
Anyone on the Panel think it wouldn't make that much of a difference, people would still do what they need to do in the current circumstances? This is a deeply unscientific poll. None of you are putting up your hands. Eileen.
Hi, Fiona. I believe it undermines the message, like Alison said, but had it been an MP, they wouldn't have got away with it. If it was anyone else, they wouldn't have got away from it. The fact this person is so close and influential to Boris Johnson is what rocks my confidence.
What I am asking is whether or not you feel it would make any difference in terms of compliance generally.
Yes, it will. Like Alison said, there is people with integrity out there and people who do the right thing for society and their family. There is other people like Dominic Cummings looks for the loophole and looks for the cheap way. You are cheating society by doing this. Ultimately you are putting lives at risk. Behaviour breeds behaviour, especially with someone so influential.
Matthew, let's hear from you.
Just on that point, with all due respect to what you have said there, if I am not mistaken, Stephen Kinnock took it on himself to go to his father's place to sing happy birthday quite blatantly in front of the cameras.
In fairness he said he was dropping off essential shopping for them that they couldn't get. That's what he said at the time.
Yes, but it wasn't done in an overly discrete fashion, what happened there. I don't have any political allegiance one way or the other but I think the public, from what I can sense, people I know, are probably just a little bit fed up with the politicising of things as well. All we are after is if we are all in it together, as the slogan says, that indeed those people in public life, like it or loathe it, you have to adhere to that probably to a greater, extent than the general populous, because it comes with the territory unfortunately.
Alex Massie.
Yes. I think at the beginning of (inaudible) there were an awful lot of people across the United Kingdom who, even if they had not voted for Boris Johnson wished him well. They recognised it was important the Government had a grip on this cricis and rose to the challenge and the occasion.
I think those sentiments were reinforced obviously when the Prime Minister fell ill himself. The events of the last week I think have enormously dented public confidence in the UK's Government to handle this crisis because people have seen and understood and it has been based on their own experience and difference between the way they have behaved and the way in this instance Dominic Cummings has behaved.
I also do think this scandal, because it has become a scandal, it started as a story, but the Government's reaction to it has turned it into a scandal, has basically wounded a lot of the messaging that is out there at the moment. It is entirely understandable in some ways that people will take the message that if there is one rule for Government advisers and a different rule for the general public, they will take the view they will do their own thing, regardless of what the official advice says.
Keith, you have your hand up.
Yes. I mean, I am going to disappoint Alex here by saying I think we should do exactly that, move on. For you political commentators and members of the opposition party, you know, Dominic Cummings' story must be like Christmas, your birthday, New Year rolled into one. You must be loving it. I mean, Emily Maitlis had to take the day off because of over excitement. Move on. I can't be bothered. I have a mind of my own. I know what to do and not to do. What Dominic Cummings does or doesn't do has no impact on me at all. You know, I am more interested in whether there is self raising flour or eggs on the market shelf tomorrow than listening to Dominic Cummings stories. Alex, yes, let's move on.
This will be music to your ears, Helen.
Well, yes, and Keith's position is more I am beginning to hear coming through, that people feel there's been a lot of talk about what Dominic Cummings did or didn't do, but actually what really matters is us having the pandemic under control and being able to get back to life, much nearer to normal.
Is that what your constituents were saying to you when it when it first broke, this story.
Of course I have received e-mails from constituents, as every MP has, constituents who have talked about some of the sacrifices they have made and things they have missed out on. I don't think we should suggest for a moment that lockdown is anything other than very hard.
Are you worried people may now -- the comment from Keith, "move on and I don't want to talk about it anymore". I am sure you will not be alone in that. Others might be thinking are there any loopholes in this system we are being asked in England and Scotland to adopt from today in terms of test and protect or test and isolate. If there are loopholes -- it appears there were a few loopholes when it came to going up to county Durham when we all thought we might have to stay at home -- if there are loopholes, should we hear about them now rather than find out later?
What we have seen so far is people really consciously following guidance and, in fact, the guidance has included recognising that some situations will be more difficult. For instance, if you are looking after somebody who is particularly vulnerable, have a childcare situation.
If you have a childcare situation then, Helen, since you mentioned it, if you have a problem with childcare and you happen to be one of the people who is identified as someone who has to stay at home for two weeks, you may not necessarily have to stay at home.
You clearly have to make sure your child is safe, as any parent should do so, but, for instance --
So if you have to leave home to do that, even if you are told to self-isolate, you can do that.
If you are contacted because you are a contact of somebody who has symptoms and told to isolate at home, you should be able to do so with your child. Everyone will have their scenarios. I mean --
Just to be clear, it is important, because we are all going to have to adjust to this now, this new system. So if you are told to self-isolate at home for two weeks, either because you have symptoms or you have been in close contact with someone who has symptoms, but you have problems with that and you find that difficult because of childcare issues, you can behave otherwise. You don't have to self-isolate.
You should follow the guidance. I don't think anyone is suggesting you should have a child in an unsafe situation.
Follow the guidance unless you can't.
That is not what I am saying actually at all. Absolutely you should follow the guidance. That has been the way all the way through that people should follow the guidance. What I am saying.
You are saying unless --
The guidance has always said that safety would be a factor and you should be clearly a responsible parent. I think what's really important is that people follow the guidance and through doing that that's how we manage to keep the infection rate under control, and so life can get back to normal, or closer to normal, which would be so much better for everybody.
Keith is partially right, why we have not moved on is there has been no apology, no contrition. The doubling down on saying you can drive 60 miles to test your eyesight and Michael Gove's touring television studies to say that is allowable because he was preparing to go back to work is treating the public like fools. That's why people have not moved on.
John Swinney.
The whole issue for me comes down to the point when Dominic Cummings made this journey everybody was told "you have got to stay at home". The reasons why you were able to leave home were really, really, really limited. Quite clearly Dominic Cummings broke those rules to make the journey that he made. Ian Murray is absolutely right. The ludicrous explanation, the thing you do when you are worried about your eyesight is drive your car for 60 miles is just beyond credibility.
So the worry I have about all of this is that it has that effect that we talked about, Fiona, that Alison talked about in her question, that it essentially undermines public confidence and compliance.
John, sorry to interrupt. It is worth pointing out when there was a similar issue in Scotland with the chief medical officer who visited her second home, Katherine Calderwood, Nicola Sturgeon did let her go but initially tried to hang on to her, as Boris Johnson is hanging on to Dominic Cummings.
When the story Mr Catherine Calderwood broke, the fist thing she did was apologise and accepted she had made a mistake. The first Minister said she had an important contribution to make to the Scottish Government about the clinical advice we require. The First Minister accepted, as did Katherine Calderwood the very act of her not following the rules she had set out undermined those rules. So she resigned within 24 hours.
What was different here? Katherine Calderwood apologised. She accepted there was a potential damage to public consent and participation and she resigned and did so with dignity. have behaved with arrogance and with disrespect to the public and they have insulted so many members of the public who have suffered so many things, missed out on critical moments in the life journey of their loved ones and that should be confronted. confronted.
We are going to move on from Dominic Cummings. Let's hear a question from Matthew Denn.
Thank you, Fiona. Track and trace appears to be encountering delay issues in the rolling out process both north and south of the border. Why is it that other nations around the world have managed to expedite these processes and could the Scottish and the UK governments look to adapt using their successes rather than too much re-inventing of the wheel?
Are you referring to things like the app, for example, Matthew? There are apps already being used in Germany, South Korea, other countries, for example, while we are still trying to get ours going. Is that what you mean.
Yes. Most reasonable people would concede the Asian countries in particular, whether it was swine flu or SARS, etc, they are probably ahead of the curve because they have gone through pandemics previously. So they have been able to adapt technology but there is plenty of other examples.
Dare I say Australia for one where they have been able to roll out this programme of track and trace with great speed from effectively ground zero. When the World Health Organisation said at the start of the global pandemic: "We need a joined-up approach between nations", it almost feels like the UK Government -- reminds me of my father when I was little. You would get lost. He would never ask for directions because he'd a superiority complex about it. It feels that way with the UK at the movement. You know, don't be afraid to ask for a bit of help rather than try to go off on your own tangent.
Let's start with you. Let me ask you about the app. Where are we with this app.
The app will be brought forward in due course. The system that we have got in place today is drawing on over 25,000 callers who will be implementing the system.
We were told by Matthew Hancock that the app was incredibly important and we don't have it. Is it just not working. What's happening with it? Just update us.
The app will support as we go further down the path, but the important thing is we have got to a point that.
We have to find out where we are with the app. If we have problems, just fill us in.
I am not personally working on the app. The important thing is we have a system in place which we have been able to launch today which means it will support some of the easing of lockdown measures. We have actually to pick up -- we do look at overseas and what other countries are doing. We look to make sure we have drawn on the best of what you see elsewhere and we have also got to a point that we can launch the NHS test and trace system, because we now have the number of cases and the infection rate under control. So we are actually in a position that it will really work to do the contact tracing and the isolating.
We are all getting to grips with how this is going to work. So if we develop symptoms, we contact one of these tracers. I am not sure who we contact actually. We contact somebody.
If you develop symptoms, you should go home and isolate. Then you should order a test, which you can do on line or by phoning 119.
So you inform 119 if you think you might have symptoms and you ask for a test. a test.
Yes.
If you test positive you are asked to supply details of who you have been in contact with.
Correct.
What do you do without the app? What do you do about all the people who you have been in contact with when you don't know their name, address or phone number, people you were on public transport with or a shopkeeper?
It goes hand in hand with social distancing. If you had been keeping 2 metres apart, that wouldn't count as a contact.
With people you have been closer, either in the workplace or perhaps because you have gone on public transport, without the app how are you going to know the people we don't have details of?
It is important when you out and about that you are social distancing.
Sometimes, as the Government accepted, it is not always going to be possible, particularly in a work environment. When you don't know all the people you have been closer than 2-metre contact with, without the app how are you going to find them?
I think you will find a lot of people will know people they have spent close contact with for a sustained period of time. That's what you would talk through with the tracers. So they can contact them. This is a known way of dealing with a pandemic and controlling it. So we are not making this up. This is a system that is known to work.
Are we ready, Layla?
Well, it sounds as though we are getting there with the human contact tracers, as has been discussed. Clearly it's only just launched. There are going to be operational issues as it starts to bed in.
Hang on. We were told it was going to be world beating on Monday by the Prime Minister.
Well, I don't think anyone on the NHS needs it to be world beating so much as really, really effective. That's what we are hoping for. At the moment it has just kicked off. We don't yet know what it's going to be like, but we are strongly hoping that this is going to be a really effective way of working.
The app question is interesting, because, of course, we were promised that the app would be here as part of that system. In some ways we don't need to be really distressed that it is not there on day one, because it's only part of the system. It is not the main part of the system. It's an adjunct. It will be something that will improve our ability to find people who are at risk and make sure that they are able to quarantine and be safe, but I think that this is really more of a challenge that we keep on being promised things are going to be here and then they're not. It's part of what I was saying before about just eroding people's confidence.
Eleanor, you wanted to come in.
Yes. Just taking that last point as well, there is a huge disconnect between what we hear on the daily briefings and the reality and the implementation of these policies on the ground and, you know, having that confidence in the infrastructure can deliver what we are being promised.
It's really incomprehensible why the UK was so unprepared. I mean, countries like Turkey have been testing and tracking since the start with a relatively low death toll and indeed, as you were saying in the Panel, we were told we would get a world beating system, but what has been rolled out now is the basics of what we should have expected weeks ago.
Sean.
I am just wondering how useful this app will be. Dr Hannah Fry said in 2017 it is time for the next pandemic like this. Most of the things that were coming out from that were about access to wi-fi, having the money to pay for wi-fi, wi-fi in your home, whether you have a phone that would be able to have this app and you would be able to download it. My mum is over 70. I don't know if she would be able to navigate something like that.
Dave.
I think there was a guy there. (Inaudible). The First Minister of Scotland said she was reticient to announce the moving from lockdown in Scotland. I understand where she is coming from. We have got to a point for me personally -- I may not be her biggest fan but her coming out at 12.30 every day, talking to us personally, giving us the brief she has given us and then for the Westminster Parliament to do what has happened over the last few weeks and say what they have said and give that mistrust, nobody is going to say -- the Government (inaudible) that people could get to the start. It is not like anything else that has ever happened. This pandemic has hit us all hard.
The trust has gone and I don't understand how you can sit there, Helen, and turn around and say to us that we've got to get the pandemic in control. You need the public on your side and that's not what we have seen from the Westminster Government.
This track and trace system tell, what if nobody volunteers themselves? I understand it is a voluntary. What happens if people don't give their name? What happens in that situation? How is that going to be handled?
It is an interesting point. If you put yourself forward, you realise you have symptoms, you realise you are going to be in quarantine for the next few weeks. All the other people you mention you have been in contact with for a sustained period of time or closer than 2 metres you are effectively dobbing them in and they are going to have to self-isolate as well. You have the same issue in Scotland as in England. What if people don't put themselves forward?
I think this is the link to the first question we have just had. The reason we have been successful in reducing the prevalence of Coronavirus is because of massive volumes of public participation and compliance. The same applies to the track, trace, self-isolate and support strategy, test and protect that we are putting out in Scotland. It relies on people coming forward where they have symptoms, indicating they have those symptoms and then for us pursuing the contact. There will be privacy applied, essentially the source of the virus that has been drawn to attention of other individuals, but it fundamentally relies on public participation, public trust and public confidence. That's why I really appreciate the comments that David made about how the First Minister has communicated about the challenges that are inherent in handling a pandemic and we need to have that similar level of communication and consent from members of the public in wrestling with the contact tracing strategy.
I mean, of course, it is a bit unfair to lay absolutely everything at Dominic Cummings' door. I am no apologist but there will be other factors in terms of why people want to apply. Can they take time off work and that kind of thing? Coming to Matt's questions, why have other nations done it fasters and could the UK Governments learn from these and do it faster themselves?
I think on the second part of that it has to be yes. This is one of the many, many things that will be considered by the inevitable series of public enquiries that are going to follow the eventual conclusion of this emergency. You know, one of the ironies here is that, you know, one of the fiercest critics of what you might term disfunction of the British state or the Whitehall apparatus and so on is one Dominic Cummings. He thinks that we need to fundamentally rethink, re-imagine, reorganise the entire bills of Government. I happen to think some of his diagnosis is quite persuasive. He is now in a position to do something about it and he is discovering curing something is rather more difficult than diagnoseing it.
I think that is something that is a long-term challenge for the British state. You know, at the moment, in terms of how viable this contact tracing operation is going to be, an awful lot of that does depend on Government communication and that is one of the areas where I think we have seen Boris Johnson actually, you know, fail, and demonstrably so. He does not give the impression of being on top of his brief. He does not inspire public confidence, and that is a significant failing at a time and in a crisis where, you know, communication, clarity and consistency of communication are, if not half the job, then certainly a significant proportion of the Prime Minister's job or First Minister's job or anybody in a leadership position the present.
Helen, do you want to respond to that?
One thing I want to pick up is that the success of the next phase does rely on people being absolutely responsible and coming forwards and booking the test.
Just in terms of what Alex was saying in terms of Boris Johnson failing as a communicate or?
I actually think he is an excellent communicate or and also a very effective at motivating the troops. I do think -- I know that you can, of course, criticise any stage of the pandemic if only this or if only that, but actually extraordinary things have happened. Extraordinary things have been achieved. A huge growth in the volume of testing at an incredible pays given where we started.
We have the second highest death tomorrow in the world in absolute numbers.
So I think we are absolutely looking at what other countries are doing of the I think one thing we do know is now is not the moment where we can actually really compare those kind of things between different countries, but the important thing is every life lost is somebody who we PHOURPB with sadness, but we also need to make sure that we are able to move on and keep the infection rate under control and try and begin to get life more in the direction of normal now.
Ian.
I think, Fiona, one of the key features of this whole pandemic has been the lack of a coordinated international response. I am tempted to say at this point could viewers in Scotland please turn over to BBC 2.
Please don't if you don't mind.
They can't even get the four nations to work together. The explanation Helen gave at the very start of her answer to this question is different in Scotland. It going to be different in Wales and Northern Ireland. Why we don't have coordination across the UK is one of the big questions people keep asking of the let's not forget, and Layla is absolutely right, the reason we are so far behind in this international track and phrase is because we abandoned thats a aprinciple in earlier March and have only come round to realiseing that's the only way out of this. The key elements of this, if I can finish on this point, you have to test, test, and test. This goes back to what the World Health Organisation said in January. England has a dreadful testing record. You are going to have at at least a quarter of a million at day in order to get this mere being proper. That's what we have been calling for. Scotland has one. worst testing rates in the entire world. Until that's resolved this system cannot operate properly to keep people safe.
John. John Swinney, do you want to come back on on that?
We are now in a situation where Scotland has the capacity to do 15,000 tests on a daily basis.
Sorry, John, to interrupt. You are not doing anything like those numbers, 15,000.
We have the capacity to do that when this is at the critical moment when we have suppressed the virus. We have the capacity to do the contact testing. We have the communications in place to set that out. We have had that in place at the critical moment where we begin to relax some of the great restrictions that have been in place. So the strategy has come together in exactly the right timing to make sure we have the capacity in place to provide the support that individuals in the country ... (overtalking) ...
Sorry, John. What's stopping you reaching the capacity for 15,000 tests and you are doing nothing like those numbers.
We are constantly expanding the range of individuals who are able to get tests. For example, we are doing a great dial more availability of of testing within care homes. We have mobile services moving around the country. We have much more capacity available for people to go to to get particular tests. We have availability of test recalls for key workers and home care workers ... (overtalking) ... There are a whole range of different areas where we have expanded the capacity and eligibility to make sure individuals can get the tests they require.
Ian, very briefly.
At the centre of this pandemic is the care homes in Scotland. Over half the deaths are in care homes and 46% of all deaths are in care homes in Scotland. We are still not testing care home patients or staff. We can talk about capacity. You have to talk about test delivery. It was simply not happening.
Yes, we are doing all that.
Care homes are getting in touch with into where patients and staff are not being tested.
Alex, you wanted to come in.
My question is, without the anti-body and people knowing they have already been infected how is this track and test going to work? Am I going to have to self-isolate over and over again? If I could many in contact with someone once, do I self-isolate and take off 14 days and if I come into contact with another person, do I take another 14 days off? People who are self-employed and other people are not going to be able to manage that. This is not going to be possible for people.
This is the tricky thing isn't it as Alex is saying, you might have to self-isolate more than once. Let's remind ourselves what at that means. If you have to share a bathroom with your family, you have to use it the a different time from them, wipe it all down. You have to put your rush I can in several bags when you put it out. You have to keep away why your family and may have to do this several times.
We are not asking people to self-isolate from their house holds.
You are not worried they infect their family.
I should different distinguish if you are asked to isolate if you have symptoms.
If you have just been
You are being asked to isolate, self-isolate at home -- asking everyone in the household to isolate, but it is during that period in the possible incubation period to see whether you might contract the virus. I recognise there is a risk that you might be asked to do that more than once, but if people follow social distancing, if people are following social distancing and minimising their contact, so if they are having to go to a work place to work but social distancing in the work place is really important, because that's how you avoid becoming somebody who is a contact of the sort that needs to isolate.
In England you can go to barbecues now. I think in Scotland, correct me if I am wrong you can't.
Yes, you can.
You can go to barbecues.
You can. Two households, no more than eight people. It is eight people. It is six in England. Two households can meet, socially distanced in public or private, outdoor spaces. So you could have a barbecue -- this is how ridiculous this situation is. It is 8 in Scotland, 6 in England. Why don't we get a common approach.
That's a heck of a garden you are going to have to have to accommodate that, for no more than 15 minutes.
We are asking people gradually to take small steps to try to make life
We are all trying to make sense of how it works since we are all going to have to be doing this. Jeanette, you wanted to come in. Let me bring you in.
I work from home and my girls go to people's houses. This track and trace has the ability to close my business down every single week. I don't know what I am going to do. I have already closed. Financially it's been a nightmare and now if any of my staff or families go to any other houses to clean or do anything we are closed. I was wondering who is going to pick up the pieces because small businesses who work from home have already been missed out on everything and now we've got track and trace. That could close me down again every single week or have girls going off sick because they have been to vulnerable houses, vulnerable places and doing their job, and I don't know what to do. How is the Government going to sort this out.
You run a cleaning company. You have various people going out to clean people's houses. John Swinney, what is the compensation package going to be? Either Jeanette, or somebody who works for Jeanette, and lots of small companies are going to be in similar positions. They get symptoms or have been close to someone who has symptoms. They are told they have to self-isolate for 14 days. What compensation will there be for them.
I think the point Jeanette makes illustrates the fact there has to be ongoing support in place for individuals and businesses to make sure people can navigate their way through what's going to be a difficult period if they have to participate in contact tracing.
What will be, specifically, the provision for the self-employed come to an end in three days. People working for Jeanette are self-employed. What provision will be put in place for them.
That is what I was coming on to. There has to be a need for an ongoing scheme of support to assist individuals in that respect, which is why we continue to press the UK Treasury to recognise this is not a short-term issue. This is a long-term issue that we have to sustain.
Now, the indications from the Treasury are that, for example, on the furlough scheme, that's going to be constrained in August by the Chancellor. That's a very damaging move, because we know that the implications of COVID are going to be with us for a long time. So we are appealing to the UK Government to recognise the longevity of this problem and put in place the support to enable that to be the case.
Okay. We have Helen Whately here, John. Let's ask her. For someone in Jeanette's position, self-employed, which comes to an end in the next three days, what will the Government do for people like her.
With this I agree on John. The importance of having the support for people who, for instance, are required to isolate because of test and trace.
It is up to the UK Government. So what are you going to do.
I know that is something the Chancellor will specifically look at on the self employment question. We know for those who are employed, they will be eligible for statutory sick pay.
Sure.
If they are asked to isolate.
For someone in Jeanette's position specifically, she's come on the programme and said what are you going to do for people like me and who work for people like that. What is the Government going to do.
I can't pre-empt the decision the Chancellor will make on that but it is absolutely true we need to make sure people are able to affor what they need in life and recognise the costs of this. Also we do need to have something which is economically sustainable. So we need to have a way to be beginning to restart the economy, because of the huge amount of economic support that has gone to those who are in employment, in businesses, across the economy, a huge amount of support. We now need to get the economy back up and running and more people going back to work.
I am sure Jeanette will wait with great interest to see what comes out. As the Prime Minister said today, "We will look after everybody locally who is affected by this". Let's see what happens.
Let's hear now from Rina Cuthbertson. Rina.
Good evening Fiona and Panel.
Was a policy decision
So was it a planned arrangement allowing people back into care homes without being tested and does it highlight the lack of value and respect.
The care homes situation I think is one of those areas where governments in all parts of the United Kingdom face a terrible set of choices, you know. In hindsight, as Nicola Sturgeon said this week, they would probably make some decisions differently. You know, at the time when people were released from hospital into care homes, it was because they feared that the NHS and hospitals were going to be overwhelmed with COVID cases. So, you know, what do we do with people who are delayed discharge, bed blocking or whatever. Well, get them out, almost regardless of their circumstance.
That now, because the sort of tsunami of COVID cases didn't quite materialise, looks to be a terrible mistake and obviously with hindsight it was a mistake, but at the time it was made I think it's reasonable for politicians to say "but this was the choice we had available to us", but you can only do that I think, you can only get the public to trust you if you communicate with candor, if you allow that mistakes will be made in a fiercely complicated, unprecedented set of situations. But you can't just allow that mistakes will be make. You have to admit to them and take ownership of them as well.
You know, people understand that this is a really, really difficult situation to manage. It is why, even though patience is beginning to wear thin, I think there is still a residual degree of goodwill for the Government, if the Government can be shown to be responsive to this situation, can show that it is accepting and taking ownership of mistakes, and the care home situation is clearly one of them. You can't go around prattling on about how you are throwing a protective ring around care homes at the same time as thousands and thousands of people are dying in care homes.
Let's hear from Elaine in the audience. You have had your hand up for a short while now.
I agree with Alex. I think at the start of this pandemic it was a tsunami and nobody knew what they would do. I think we saw the horrific pictures of the Italian hospitals where patients were in corridors and couldn't catch a breath.
I think the right decision was made at the time to make sure the hospitals were clear so we wouldn't have those images in our newspapers. I think Nicola Sturgeon has looked back, like Alex said there, and thought -- hindsight is a great thing -- probably would have done things differently. I think the choice at the time having that tsunami of patients with COVID versus letting elderly patients go into a care home, we would have probably thought that was going to be a safer place for them at the time. It was a lose/lose choice now that we look back at the time to try to get away from those images we were seeing all over the press with people not getting a hospital bed. It didn't come to that, which is a good thing. So I think it is a lose/lose. It is an unfortunate situation.
Okay. Rina, you wanted to come back in. You asked the question.
Thanks very much. I think in terms of the planning, you know, we have known about this since the end of December, beginning of January. I know it is not a long time. What has been clear from the very start is the most vulnerable in the communities is elderly. We let people leave hospitals without being tested and put them into care homes. We put them back into their own homes to be cared for by home care workers or by support agencies or by family and nobody was tested.
So I know there was tough decisions and I am not just talking about the Scottish Government. I am talking about generally across the UK. I know we were flooded with pictures with it. Maybe when the cameras went in and out of care homes would they be flooded with as many pictures with people dying in care homes horrenously. There is no winners in this. I know it's been difficult. I know the whole thing is new to us. I just think they are the most vulnerable and they are always I feel the first to be forgotten, you know.
I think just the other thing to say, Fiona, I have listened tonight. Every time the Conservative speaks all I hear is "Well, you know, we can't compare ourselves to other countries. Let's put the Dominic wrap to bed. Let's not talk about anything that has shown us up to be the unorganised party we are".
Helen, I will give you a chance to respond to that in a minute. Thank you, Rina for that. I am not trying to cut you off
I think the circumstances that have been narrated by all three of the people who have spoken, I can't really disagree with their analysis. At the time that COVID was coming towards us we realised that we thought the best thing to do was to ensure that older people who were being accommodated in hospitals where there was no clinical need for them to be there would be better protected if they were in care homes, because if there was an influx of COVID cases into hospitals where vulnerable, elderly people were, the danger of cross-infection was very high.
It was safe to do so, if the risk assessment was undertaken, those individuals could be accommodated either at home with support or in a care home.
Surely we knew, John -- sorry to interrupt -- we could see from the examples in other countries how brutal Coronavirus was to the older generation. That evidence was already there.
Yes, but my point is we judged the best and safest way to support those individuals was in a care home setting or in a home with support, rather than hospital which would be the epicentre of handling Coronavirus cases.
Let me just turn to Layla for a moment. Hearing what John and Alex is saying, there were other countries before us grappling with this. They admitted people from hospitals back into care homes. In some cases in some countries they put them into quarantine, special places or quarantine within care homes. Is there anything we could have learned from that reasonably or is Alex right, this is the best we could have done in the circumstances?
It is incredibly hard to say. I look at what other countries have done. As you say, there's been some sort of quarantine centres or interim places to go. It is not exactly clear. I mean, obviously what has happened with COVID-19 and care homes has been an absolute tragedy, but the reasons for that are not quite as clear-cut as sometimes people are assuming.
So we hear people say, "Oh, it is because everyone was sent out of hospital", but actually when you look at the data, it is not totally clear that that was something that has created this challenge, in fact.
You think it might have spread in care homes anyway.
That's the thing. At the end of the day we don't know when this first started circulating. It looks as though when you started testing has a real impact on this, looking at other countries and care homes. It looks like people going in and out of care homes, potentially, of course, playing its role. While we really, really want an answer to that, it is too early to figure out what's going on, but we can see that we need an answer and we need to learn. I guess what I would say is this really exposes the under-investment and the undervaluing of social care for successive governments. What we really need here is a bit of a long-term plan.
We have seen what's going on in social care. It is really great that the Government has now, you know, giving some money towards social care to say "Goodness, we need to bolster, for example, your infection control mechanisms". Our members have been telling us for ages that while hospitals started to get PPE in, care homes have been in a much worse position for that. There is a lot of disparity for that. There is now funding so that care homes are able to get better infection control processes in place and things like that but that's a short-term fix.
When we look at this, we think goodness, the moment is here for social care reform. What are we going to do about it? What is the Government going to do about it.
Ian.
I think the chronic underfunding of social care across United Kingdom and Scotland, the chickens are coming home to roost. There is a problem for a long time. We need to have some political consensus to fund social care. We have been talking about this for too long. Let's go through what we already knew. We knew the prevalence of this disease was in older people, it was much more severe in older people. We knew from the 2014 Report and Task Force for Social Care that there was 34 recommendations. Very few of them were implemented in Scotland.
We knew in 2015.
We just heard Layla say we can't be sure that that was the critical deciding factor in terms of the exponential growth in care homes.
46% of all Coronavirus deaths in Scotland have been in our care homes. This was the epicentre of Coronavirus. That is why, because se sent peole there without testing, we sent people there with a lack of PPE. You looked at the figures earlier. Scotland does have one of the worst testing rates in the world. The biggest problem with that is trying to get testing into the social care sector. We are only doing between 4,000 and 6,000 tests a day. How can we possibly protect the residents and staff in care homes without fundamentally testing them regularly and making sure that they are safe.
Let me bring you back to Rina's original question. Was the policy a planned arrangement, putting patients in care homes from hospitals who had not been tested, and does it highlight the lack of value and respect we place on elderly citizens.
Every step of the way the Government followed scientific guidance on what to do, and clinical guidance.
There was also -- Government guidance? On April 2, the UK Government guidance is negative tests are not required for asymptomatic elderly patients prior to transfer into care homes. That was Government guidance.
Government guidance was informed by the science and by the scientific guidance. What has happened over time we have learned. We have learned and the world has learned that actually you have a situation with people who may be asymptomatic carriers of the virus. It is particularly hard, we now know, with older people who do not display the most common set of symptoms. So there is a particular reason which is why we are now doing testing of all staff and residents in care homes for older people and those with dementia, exactly to do that, to pick up those who may be asymtomatic as well as those who have symptoms, because we are learning.
Just to go back and pick up on some of the comments from the audience, some really, really thoughtful comments, but one thing I will say is when I became a chemist on 14th February, since then so much of my time and so many people in Government has been on how we can support social care, both care homes and home care through the pandemic. We know it is really hard.
John Swinney, you wanted to come in. We are almost out of time. I wanted to let you have another word.
The point I wanted to make was that in Ian's last answer he talked about the need for there to be measures to tackle delayed discharges. Then when the Government tackles the issue of delayed discharges, we get criticised for it by Ian Murray.
There are really difficult decisions that have had to be taken here with the best interests of the population at heart, tough decisions in tough circumstances.
I am afraid our hour is up. I want to say, Eleanor, I see you have your hand up there. We have run out of time. Forgive me for not coming to you.