We'll get underway with the first question.
Hi. Why has it taken until 15 February for the government to impose quarantine at the border. Why haven't lessons been learned from Australia who closed their border in the first wave and now have low levels of infection?
It is a great question, a question we have been asking in Parliament for the last year. We're an island nation and most other island nations across the world did better than us because they took the decision early to stop incoming traffic. We had the South Africa strain for 50-odd days. It is only now we take the decision to close down the borders. It's too late. There was a study by Aberdeen University which showed most of the deaths happened because of the inward variants coming in to Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. It seems, again, where both governments have been too slow to react.
The consequence of that is we're behind the curve. It is still not coming in until the 15th which means tens of thousands of people will be landing into the UK, potentially with new variants of COVID. It is too late. We welcome it, we wish it was every country, it is every country in Scotland, there are big issues about what to be done, how people can access -- how they can pay for them. I have two constituency members, one has gone to the Czech Republic, she doesn't know how she's going to pay for it.
Do you think the taxpayer should pay for it?
It is £1,750. There has to be some way of looking at the system you had before when you come out of this and saying why are we asking people to self-isolate then not checking when they were travelling. It has been a mess. There's a resolution here but it is too slow, too late and we are suffering the consequences of that.
Michael.
The first thing is we didn't have the vaccine and we didn't have the new variants which the scientific advice is that we should be very concerned about. So that is why the borders are being closed. But we are in the ridiculous situation where, in England, the borders are closed to people coming from "red" countries, whereas in Scotland it is coming from all countries.
Where do you think it should be?
I don't think it should be either. We should concentrate on getting the vaccine done as quickly as possible.
But we should let anyone who wants to come in come in?
In Scotland no one is allowed from any country whatsoever and where the transport minister was suggesting we should continue with this until the rest of the world is vaccinated. By then we will have trashed our economy and destroyed our industries. We have to balance the economic interests along with the health risks. That's a difficult decision. I think all politicians from all parties should support the government in what it is trying to do.
We have a few hands up. Lindsay.
How can we stop someone landing in Heathrow Airport then renting a car and driving up to Scotland?
John?
If we don't sort our health crisis, we're not going to be able to sort our economic crisis. Simple as that.
Jim.
The Isle of Man locked down 25 March. They now have no social distancing, pubs are open, kids back at school. We are far too late and just completely wrong.
You think we should close the borders to all countries?
I don't understand how 600,000 people a month can be coming into this country on business.
It is not that high at the moment but it was previously. Jeane.
It is a good question. I'm sorry, but, Michael, I think you're completely wrong. All the public health advice here in Scotland in the summer we brought cases down to virtually zero and the only reason they increased, primarily, was international travel. So we permitted the virus to re-enter the country. Now, people across the country here and across the UK are working really, really hard, putting up with restrictions on their everyday life, staying at home, that's a big message, not seeing friends and families, wearing face coverings, all of that. They're doing that because they want to reduce the level of the virus in their communities, in their country. I think it is government's obligation to then make sure that we take the steps to ensure that we don't bring the virus into the country. And I think the UK government has done something but not enough. It should be entirely all countries. We should say to people, I'm sorry, if you are travelling in, as we are saying in Scotland, if you are traveling in to Scotland then you need to quarantine in these hotels for 10 days, tested before you travel --
How are you going to enforce that? How are you going to enforce it when people can fly into England and go to Scotland.
Exactly. And the point goes back to you and your party.
No, it could come back to you, Jeane. Are you going to be -- what about people who arrive in England, drive up and want to go to Scotland? [D ONE]
There's two things we will do. We'll keep on the discussions across the four nations with the UK government. I had one tonight just before I came here, to try and persuade them to not stick to just the red zones but, in the meantime, we also have to look at what we do about the land border precisely because of what the lady in the audience said. Most international travel into Scotland is routed through the big hubs around London, Manchester and elsewhere.
Have you got a plan?
What you can't have is people coming in, getting on public transport, coming up to Scotland and we don't know about that and they're not required to quarantine in a way that we can manage. So we have to consider what our options are about that land border. Now, I would rather that wasn't the case, to be honest. I would rather across the four nations we were take
You haven't given an explanation why it has taken until mid-February to make the decisions. If what you said is true, and I have no reason to believe it is not true, that we imported the variants, why has it taken the Scottish government as well as the UK government to 15 February when it comes in to do anything about it?
You'll know that not all the powers are devolved to Scotland.
You have the decision now.
We are trying to reach an agreement across the four nations. We have taken the approach as others have from the outset, where we can get four-nation agreement -- where we are now is we can't be wait any longer for this. We've learned those lessons from the summer and we're saying now that we need to prevent international travel from any country into Scotland, and that means we do have to look at what our options are in the land border because the UK government won't go far enough.
It is a decision you made. It is a decision where the Scottish Parliament has the power to make it.
Angela. Let's bring you in.
I think most governments have been too slow to act on the border issue. If you have been listening to the experts, the scientists they have been saying since the beginning of the pandemic there are clear strategies to follow to limit the impact it has. On a number of occasions the UK has not followed that advice, the border being one example. And we're now in a situation where we have vaccines. It is unprecedented, really, when you think back to the start of the pandemic, we were being told it would be a minimum of 18 months but probably longer, yet here we are less than a year and we are well into the vaccine roll-out programme. That's incredible. But what is vital now is that we try to prevent variants because that's the big threat to the vaccine strategy. The quickest way to get the economy back on track, to do all of these things is to get in control of the virus. So we're only talking about, hopefully, another matter of months before we should have our population as best vaccinated as we possibly can. It is too little too late, but we should be locking down as much as we have to, focussing on the vaccine roll-out, then we can think about moving forward after that.
Stephen?
So, I have -- and I listened to the audience and I speak to my friends and I ask people about this topic. The thing I get more than anything else is the sense of fear that the public has now. I look back to where we were in March last year, what we were asked to do, the plan was to flatten the curve, protect the NHS, slowly but surely we have shifted this goalposts to what's expected. I have to say I understand why so many people have this sense of fear because of what they hear from the media, from politicians and so on. I also understand why people feel to strongly about the border issue.
I cannot understand for the life of me why 12 months ago this was not a policy we instituted straightaway. When I hear people talk about the policy today, what I hear is they don't understand why we didn't do this a year ago. But our politicians are not paid to peddle paranoia or feed on our fears, they are paid to lead. When I look at all of the news today, I see signs of hope everywhere. We have better therapeutics, we have falling cases, we have a better understanding of infection rates, we have 90 percent of the most vulnerable people in the country vaccinated. I ask what are people afraid of.
It is not quite that yet.
90 percent of the over 70s have been vaccinated. 50 percent of the panellists in this room have been vaccinated. So when I think about what it is that politicians are trying to encourage, I say we weren't ready nor Covid-19, we weren't ready for lock down and we have to be ready for life after lock down. When I hear politicians talking about banning all inbound travel --
That's the question. Do you think that should have happen now?
I understand if a political leader says to me we have taken a wisk-based approach, these are 33 risky countries and we think this risk is worth protecting against. I think be it's a popular decision to ban all travel.
The variant is present in 35 other countries not on the list.
Which variant in are we going to protect against all future variants we don't know about? The point is I honestly believe we have to start to balance the interests of public health with private freedoms and all of the other aspects of our lives. I can tell you there are many other threats to our livelihoods and to our lives than Covid-19 and I see only a one-dimensional approach to this.
As an island nation we had the opportunity to learn, we were slightly ahead of the curve, we can't have learned from New Zealand and Australia. They managed to close their entire country borders, in between states. We have done nothing about it and we've had the worse death rate in Europe. It's an absolute scandal. This should have been at the outset, close the borders, stop the virus coming in and contain it. Instead we've had almost a year's worth now of open/close, start/stop, lockdown and various restrictions. It is too slow, too little, and too late. It is still a botched job because now we're going to create a border between England and Scotland, never mind with Ireland.
If we had done that last year, the moment you release the lockdown it gets back into the community. What has changed is that we have a vaccine. If you have the population vaccinated, then having a lockdown you can get out of the lockdown and you can save the jobs and the costs, which are enormous. Our economy is hedge raging, every day our debts are going up. So we need to balance the health needs against the economic needs of the country.
That is the wrong balance. One of the audience said, quite rightly, unless you get the health needs sorted, the economy will go down the tank anyway because people will get seriously ill, they will die and our NHS will be overwhelmed. People understand that that's why they are doing all the things they are doing. On the vaccine, the vaccine isn't a magic bullet. The vaccine is one of the really important layers of protection but right now we do not know for sure how effectively it is on transmission. We know that it protects you from serious illness and death -- not completely, but very well, indeed -- but we don't know that it stops you transmitting the virus from one person to another. That is critical information.
Why was this not done a year ago? For all the things that are said, it should have been done earlier.
Let's hear from the audience.
I do understand the balancing act, it is a delicate balancing act between the economy and health, but we've known for a long time the virus is spread very quickly with the movement of people and between people. So it is almost like the government is playing Russian roulette with people's health. We are too slow. I think that will damage the economy more than anything else.
I'm going to -- we could talk about this all evening. I'm going to move on, take another question from Iain.
If the SNP get a majority in May, what right do the Tories have to deny Scottish diplomacy withholding a referendum on independence?
Angela?
If the SNP get a majority in May then the Tories don't have any authority to deny a second independence referendum, but I have to point out that we've already been in this situation. The SNP has won so many elections since 2014 and somewhere in its manifesto it always had the reference to the second independence referendum. So we're already in a state where we have the Conservative government and even if it was a Labour Government saying they are going to block a second referendum because now is not the time.
You have to excuse me but I don't think a phrase as simplistic as "now is not the time" should overtake parliamentary democracy.
The fact we're in a does that make any difference, do you think?
If they win a majority they have another Parliamentary term for 4 or 5 years. We are hoping by the end of this year that we might be coming out of the crisis stage of the pandemic. Nobody is saying if the SNP won they are going to hold the reserve come the week after. But we have to get back to the point here. This is not about timing. We can have debates about timing and when the best time to do it would be. The point here is about who has the right, who has the authority. Now, if the Scottish people go to the polls and they vote for something quite clearly in an election and then that is denied by Westminster, then they're effectively saying the Scottish Parliament doesn't have, really, any authority. And we're then beyond democracy. This is the part that worries me. If we exhaust the democratic roots and Westminster keeps saying no, the big question then is what happens next.
Because people in Scotland are not simply just going to say oh well, we voted for it but they said no, so let's move on. Of course they're not. They're going to get angry about the fact that they are being denied the thing they voted for. I think we would be getting into very, very dangerous territory if Westminster tries to continue to block this. It looks like the SNP is going to win a majority. The polls in favour of independence are rising consistently. Westminster can't keep ignoring this. It has to be addressed.
Sharon.
So Scottish trade to the UK accounts for 60 percent of exports compared with 19 percent to the UK --
To the EU, I think you mean.
I don't think it is responsible for Scotland to try to be leaving the UK right now and attempting to join the EU. It can't be considered economically justifiable, let alone before peak COVID. And the situation is even worse now.
Jason?
I would like to point out to people and try to remind them that the SNP is not the only pro-independence party in Scotland. There is the green-party.
Yes, the SNP could quite conceivably not gain a majority but there could be a majority vote for pro-independence parties overall if you take into account the green vote.
John.
Yes. I mean, after Brexit which divided us, now with this pandemic, do we really want independence to resow division and cripple our economy? It was once in a lifetime we were told, and we voted.
Michael.
I took the view that if the SNP had been able to get the support of the Scottish electorate then there should be a referendum, and I said that many years ago. And we had a referendum. And it was once in a generation referendum. The things about people who say they believe in democracy, they don't accept the referendum. And the Scottish Parliament, the elections to the Scottish Parliament, the duties of the Scottish Parliament are about health, education, employment, the things that really matter to people. They're not about constitutional matters. They're reserve to the United Kingdom Parliament. The reason the SNP are campaigning on this constitutional issue is because they're not interested in devolution, they're interested in the destruction of the United Kingdom. And they don't want the election to be about their record on health or any other areas because it is abysmal. When I left office, Scottish education was way ahead of England, now it is way behind.
If you look at the record on health and elsewhere, I find it extraordinary, in the middle of a pandemic, when we have all the consequences in terms of lost jobs and the rest that people should be thinking that we should divide our country instead of putting together the damage which has been done by this virus, getting our economy growing again in order to pay down the debt and to pay jobs. I find it utterly unbelievable. And Scotland, Scotland is not the SNP. The Scottish Nationalist Party shouldn't take the electorate for granted and assume they are going to get a majority. They should concentrate on health and education.
We are not insisting or taking for granted we would get a majority at all. It is curious, Michael, that actually the people in Scotland who are talking -- political parties who are talking most about independence are your own and Labour. What we're talking about is a pandemic and how you rebuild Scotland. And our view is if there is a majority in the next Parliamentary election on 6 May, 21 polls in a row, people saying that they want to be independent, but the Scottish people, the basic fact here is the people in Scotland have the right to choose whether or not they want to have a referendum.
They did.
You only get a choice once.
That's what your party said. Once in a generation. (My video has stopped). -- that we would be in the European Union. If we voted to leave the UK union we would be out of Europe. Look what's happened. 62 percent of people in Scotland voted against Brexit and now we're out of Europe with huge bureaucracy, real damage to the economy in Scotland, and I hope we come on to that. So what we are saying is people in Scotland have the right to choose. They have the right to choose. We'll have the argument about whether or not we are independent if people choose that they want a referendum. It is really straightforward and it is a basic democratic question and no one, actually no one, should deny the democratic right of people in Scotland to choose if they want to have a referendum to be an independent country or not.
Gary.
I think the point that Jeane Freeman makes is quite a good point. I think the people of Scotland have spoken on a number of occasions with regard to how they want to be managed in the UK environment.
I don't think Boris Johnson has a mandate to say to the Scottish people it was a once in a lifetime referendum. You only have to look at the way Boris Johnson treats the SNP group down at Westminster in debate. If no one watched, he treats them with total disregard. The Scottish people wanted to remain in the EU, that's been disrespected. It is now clear there's a mandate from the Scottish people and if there's a clear mandate in May with an overwhelming majority SNP government, I think Boris Johnson has no choice but to give the Scottish people their wish and grant them another referendum.
Alex?
I think the handling of the pandemic has shown there will be divides after it's over. We don't have the flexibility up here to do a lot other than what we're getting from Westminster. We need to take control of our own destiny in some ways and look after our own affairs and not be cowtowing with him about all these topics. Let's have another referendum.
Simon.
I'm an SNP supporter. I voted for independence. If Boris doesn't want -- he needs to get the SNP name right.
What you see is what you get.
Scottish Nationalist Party.
Stephen, give us your perspective.
I used to live in Edinburgh, about a mile away from here, I spent some of the happiest days of my life right here. It would make me incredibly sad to think of Scotland as an independent country. I understand as an entrepreneur and somebody who didn't want to report to somebody else, I understand the urge to find independence. When I think of Scotland, I think of the potential of an independent Scottish nation, I have no doubt whatsoever that Scotland could be a thriving independent country, with an exciting future. But I have to say, you ask any entrepreneur what happens when you quit your job and you set off on your own. Anybody who tells you it is going to be easier or better, you are going to be better off, that you're going to have even more independence, I can tell you it is not true. As an entrepreneur you sacrifice so much, work twice as hard to get half as much. You risk losing everything. It takes a long time for that to pay off. If this is the path Scotland wants to go down, I can understand both sides of the argument, but if anybody tells you it is going to be easy or better or you are going to have more independence, I can tell you there's a lot of other problems that come.
You supported Brexit. Would you not have supported the same argument to the UK as a whole?
One of the reasons I supported Brexit was I became very interested in homelessness. I saw a real challenge with homelessness but social equality in general as being part of a nation of 28 nations with open borders, some of which have an income 80 percent less than the UK. We should, by the way, provide every homeless person with somewhere to sleep, but then find that applies to potentially 500 million people. So that was some very specific reasons why I voted for Brexit. I thought economically we would be worst off but socially more cohesive. I think over the shorter term, I genuinely, hand on heart, if Scotland say they want to go for independence, I will be sad but I will be supportive and optimistic, but this is a decision that will affect this generation and future generations and children and people not even born for decades and hundreds of years. What is the rush? Right now every nation around the world is trying to figure out how on earth they are going to recover from this economic and social disaster, and with 250,000 children living in poverty, I cannot understand this is the time. But, that said, if this is the time, then I think it is for the Scottish people to decide.
Alistair?
I think one of the thing that's fueling the desire for Scotland to become independent, despite the fact there are maybe concerns or problems about what that might entail, is how badly the UK government is handling just about everything. That has been mentioned already, some of the comments and things in Westminster are absolutely unhelpful.
Let me say one more thing then I'll come back to you. Kelly.
So we're getting a second chance, if we get the referendum we're getting a second chance to vote for independence. But what if, as Stephen said, it's a lot harder than it turns out -- are we going to get a chance to go back?
Buyer's remorse, if you like. Ian.
I think the reason they want to turn it into whether or not we have a referendum is because they can't defend their own record in government. The Scottish Parliament requires to deal with 250,000 -- Education system -- to put them into -- this was all before the pandemic. People are worried about their jobs, worried about their -- have all talked about a referendum this year. That's extraordinary.
So, maybe if we're going to turn the May election into a reserve on whether or not we have a referendum we could start asking the big questions to be debated now. The currency issue, how we get back into the EU. Jeane already said very clearly that she thinks Brexit is a material change of circumstances even though it was highlighted in the white paper and David Cameron highlighted before the next referendum. We have to put every single focus into COVID recovery and we're going to have a referendum, set up a new nation in 18 months, that was the proposal before, no access to the EU, the EU border -- no answers about currency. It is 7 years since the last referendum. We don't have these questions in front of us. The oil price was supposed to be $115 a barrel. It has been less than half of that. The entire economy was based on that. The economic proposition is a disaster. Brexit is a disaster. If Brexit taught us anything we should be building bridges, not walls. I'm the only person on this Panel that is consistent here. Because I believe Scotland should be be in the UK and the UK should be in the EU. That's the way you make your economy strong, that's the way you bring people together.
Angela.
We have a saying "with crisis comes opportunity". I think some politicians like Iain are not -- you want to talk about the SNP's domestic record. It's like the world is in flames and you want to talk about a tiny little part of it rather than see the bigger picture. Since 2014, we have now had Brexit, Scotland still does not want Brexit and we feel in Scotland as though that -- we talk about democracy, recognising the results of referendums, we feel that one hasn't been realised in Scotland. But also we now have COVID. This is a crisis that none of us saw coming. Sometimes, when you're in the middle of a situation like that, especially when the population seems to have high approval of how Nicola Sturgeon is dealing with this as opposed to Boris Johnson, what you then have is a population that could be looking at this and thinking, well, things probably can't get an awful lot worse than they are now so maybe this is just exactly the time to do it. We're in a crisis anyway, so let's take control of it for ourselves then we can build back up for ourselves. I think politicians are not quite getting this bigger picture. They are arguing about the smaller detail of it.
You have to look at the polls, Iain and Michael. If you're a unionist, you should be looking at the polls and see that support for independence is going up. If you want to stop that, you need to come up with a good proposition for the union which isn't just how terrible Scotland would do if it went out there as an independent country. There's no reason why Scotland couldn't thrive and survive as an independent country. You can't keep going back to the same arguments. You have to give people something more.
I can give you 20 billion reasons why we're lucky to be part of the United Kingdom. 20 billion is how much has come north of the border.
This is not free money, Michael. This is money the Scottish taxpayer pays into the economy.
Your own figures show Scotland gets a huge amount from the United Kingdom Treasury. This particular crisis, I didn't say, the Flo scheme, the vaccines where would we have voted --
We would have been where the UK is, borrowing money to get through this.
Can I finish my point? Where would we be if we voted to leave the United Kingdom? How would we have managed? We wouldn't have had the strength of the United Kingdom around us. We wouldn't have had the support that we've had for the furlough scheme. We wouldn't have had the ability to be able to finance it.
If you want to have another referendum you at the very least should spell out how we'd survive. What would happen to people's pensions? How would we pay their pensions? How would you pay your share of the debt which is now enormous? There's going to be half a trillion pounds of debt. It is just fantasy politics and fantasy economics to think that you are going to risk the future of Scotland by shearing yourself away from the strength of the United Kingdom around you.
What I don't really understand is why, in the face of the 21 polls that show that a majority -- increasing majority of people in Scotland want not only a referendum but to be independent, an SNP --
That's because you keep telling them lies about the consequences.
People in Scotland are not daft. They know when they are being told lies. It is disrespectful to say such a thing. What we've said, and it isn't actually a referendum or election, the SNP and other parties will take a prospectus to the electorate that will be more than about referendum and independence, but the basic fact is the people of Scotland should have the democratic right to choose whether or not they want a referendum. If they do, if they do, then we'll have all these arguments on both sides.
The people of Scotland have the democratic right to be told the consequences. Jeane, if you just tell me tonight what the currency would be and when, I'm happy to take that away and look at it. If you tell me what the -- to the EU would be. You're doing what the Brexiteers did, cherry pick. You don't want the deal that's just been signed between the UK and the EU, the border at we aric. The deal between the EU and the UK would determine what the aborter would be between Scotland and England. Scotland under your proposal would be an EU country and England would not be therefore the border between Scotland and England would be determined by the very trade agreement signed -- signed by Boris Johnson on 31 December. Be straight with people.
I'm happy to be straight with people, if you will.
I'm going to stop not because it is not interesting, but there are other people in the room. Let's take another question.
Nicola Sturgeon suggests that the SNP is a party divided, splinter and in crisis.
You don't think it is divided with what is going on?
It is a big party.
Would you describe it as united?
It has disagreements. Michael belongs to a party that has disagreements, one currently about their Scottish leader. Iain has had disagreements with his party. The point is it's not uncommon for there to be disagreements between party members. And I think that that is entirely to be expected. What isn't acceptable, and I think it is important that I say this, is any disagreements are conducted that is disrespectful of other points of view. I want to be in a political party and a country where different viewpoints and different arguments, Donald Dyer famously said, are conducted with respect and without abuse. That is the key point.
Who do you think is being disrespectful then?
People feel that they have been -- when they have been voicing opinions on different matters that they have been not listened to and that they have been treated disrespectfully on all sides of the different arguments and disputes going on.
But the party itself and all those people who support it and all those activists are getting on with the job that they want to do, which is to promote what the SNP is doing, to promote the case for independence, and on the question of Alex Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon, I have worked with Nicola Sturgeon for five years. I know her to be a woman of considerable integrity. She is completely focused on what she believes is the right thing to do for the people of Scotland, right now in the pandemic and in building back after the pandemic.
Ian.
The party is tearing itself apart. You are either in the Salmond or Sturgeon corner. You have issues in court, issues around sexual harassment, a committee in Parliament unable to get to the truth because of obfiscation and denial from all the parties involved. You have a situation whereby the First Minister of Scotland, who has all the talents that Jeane has said, and I agree, she has a tremendous amount of talent, can't remember meetings she had.
This isn't true.
Nicola Sturgeon had a meeting with the former first minister in the house of the chief executive of the SNP who happens to be married to the current first minister, and nobody mentioned what they were talking about. This is a cess pit that has to be resolved for two reasons. It is bringing democratic structures in Scotland into disrespect, and, secondly, there is women involved here who were brave to come forward and it is all being swept under the carpet. It is a disgraceful thing that's happened and it is a disgraceful thing what's happened to Joanna Here. She has done her home affairs brief, I worked closely with her during the Brexit, cast aside from the SNP for having a different view. That's the kind of party we have running Scotland at the moment. It is undermining our democracy. Until we get to the truth we will never know what the problem has been. Nicola Sturgeon still refuses to answer the question.
Let me restate obviously Alex Salmond was acquitted and Nicola Sturgeon denies misleading Parliament.
There is an independent review of whether or not the first minister broke the code of conduct. She says no, and I believe her. Secondly, there is an independent review that will go through due process. Secondly, the first minister said from the outset that she will appear in front of that committee, under oath, and answer all questions that it has. So the idea that she is trying to hide away in some way couldn't be further from the truth, and you know it.
Stephen.
I am delighted to say I don't have very much to say about this. There's a lot of he said, they said, she said, I am delighted not to have to be too much party to this discussion. When I travel back home to Belfast, there's a lot of local politics. When I travel to Scotland, the same. When I go to travel abroad, we have business all over the world, and the Scottish people are united when they travel. British people are united when we travel, always when we're at home these things appear. I'm delighted not to have much to say.
Okay, you stay out of it.
I would like to know why the inquiry is taking so long. There's clearly more to this argument on both sides.
There is a date it has to report by. Jason.
I think Iain touched on this already, but the concerns raised around the treatment of transsexuals in the party speak to sprinting as well.
Well, the question is does the fallout between Alex Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon suggest that the party is divided?
There is a Civil War going on inside the SNP. You only have to look at the Twitter feeds to see that. I'm less concerned about that than what is happening to the standards of government in Scotland. When you have civil servants giving evidence under oath and having to come back to correct their testimony, when you're told that millions are spent on coaching them before giving evidence, something has gone very, very wrong with the government of Scotland. When the government votes 0 on two indications for information to be made to the inquiry and the first minister ignores it, something has gone very wrong.
When Alex Salmond is expected to appear, he was acquitted by the courts, half a million pounds of our money was spent in a process which the courts found to be improper, and when he's asked to go to the inquiry and the evidence which he has presented is not made available to the public, it does begin to look as if there has been some dirty work at the crossroads. That is very damaging for Scotland. I hope in the election that the SNP will be given their jotters because this is, at the absolute heart of the integrity of government.
Angela.
I think that we have to question how much of this actually cuts through to the public. I recognise that we're in a pandemic so people are online more than they have ever been. Scottish political social media is smaller than that and there's a lot of -- and things can come across as being a much bigger deal than they might be in reality to the wider population. I think we're talking about committees and procedures and people giving evidence, then going back and is Salmond going to speak, is he not going to speak?
People are strategising to follow this. It is a boring procedure. You have to recognise that Nicola Sturgeon's popularity is at quite incredible levels right now. It really is, considering how long the SNP have been in government. That's quite unusual. And where it might be conventional if you were found to have misled Parliament or broken the ministerial code, it might be convention for those normally to resign, but these aren't normal times. I don't think there is public appetite out there for the removal of Nicola Sturgeon from office. So I'm not -- I don't think that this is the big Nicola Sturgeon downfall that some of the opponents think. More broadly than that, the idea of splits with the SNP, you have to remember that after 2014 the SNP had a massive surge in membership and they were coming from different walks of life, the left, the right and the centre. They were all conjugating with the SNP on the constitutional issue of independence. So there's no way that the SNP could possibly have provided a political home for them all long-term.
The SNP as a single issue party can provide a home but because the SNP is in government in Scotland as well, it then has to come up with policies and it has to take positions on things. So you can't walk -- it is a tightrope to walk and the SNP can't continue to do that long term. It was inevitable something like this would happen but the SNP was counting on it happening after independence not before it. .
What I thought I heard is because a politician is particularly popular at the moment, then it may be okay if they breach a ministerial code, they would not resign where otherwise they normally would. I didn't have much to say about this before but I can't believe what I just heard. I have to say, I think the Scottish people expect more from their politicians than the rest of the UK.
Just to clarify, is that what you said? Is that what you meant?
I'm not saying that's okay for that to be the situation, but we're in a crisis in an unprecedented time where I think the public would be far more likely to overlook that because the pandemic is what is at the forefront of everybody's mind now. [ DONE]
It's not about the SNPs, Labour, the Tories. It is about the SNP seeking the truth.
I have 10 minutes left. I want to get this question in from Robert Clark.
Is the government doing enough to help assist the fishing and shellfish industries?
Michael.
The answer to that is no. They made some 100 million pounds available, but the fact is that there is quite a lot to be sorted out in terms of the application of idiotic rules both across the straits into Europe and also within our own country in Northern Ireland.
The EU say this is the deal, you have to deal with it.
Listen. If you land a box of fish in Peterhead and want to get it to Northern Ireland, you used to be able to do that by the afternoon. Now it takes -- you are expected under some of the rules to give three days' notice of the plan.
These are rules the government agreed to.
I'm happy to debate with you, but if I finish the point. You're meant to give notice of 3 days of the landing of the fish. The fish are still in the sea at that point. It is a ridiculous rule. So what Michael Gove has done, he set up a task force under David -- what they need to do is sort out these petty, stupid regulations otherwise we are going to get into a very difficult situation where we have to look at the whole Northern Ireland protocol again.
Similarly, in Holland and in France, people are being told that they can't get their lorries through because they used a red stamp rather than a blue stamp. This is the EU playing games and showing bad blood and bad faith because they cannot stand the fact that Britain has left the European Union and the United Kingdom is now an independent country. We need to sort out these these things. It is essential we do so and we support our fishing industry and give them the opportunity to take advantage of the benefits that come from being out of the EU.
It sounds like Michael is making an argument for not leaving the EU in the first place. Boris Johnson went on TV and said there would be no non-tariff barriers with the deal done with the EU. There are lots of non-tariff barriers.
The Scottish fishing Federation chief executive said herself we must be the only coastal state that has full control over our waters but we are fishing with one hand tied behind our backs. This is the deal the prime minister put together and the deal he signed. The Northern Ireland protocol is there because we had to put a border in the Irish Sea because the border could not go on the island of Ireland. This is a consequence of leaving a trading union with one of your biggest trading partners. It is not a consequence of stupid rules; it is a consequence of what has been signed.
Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom.
Yes but not in terms of the single market. The border in the Irish Sea, in the customs union.
We're applying custom union rules.
That's the problem. They had to keep them in in order to stop the non-tariff barriers being put in place. It is ridiculous. The only upside of all this, and I spoke to the Scottish Fishing Federation yesterday, because the customers are depressed all over Europe but when that customer base comes back it will be dreadful unless it is done now.
I grew up in a coastal town in Northern Ireland and I can tell you the problems facing coastal communities and fishing communities are not new since 1 April. They have been undersupported for decades.
But there is a different situation now in terms of selling their fish.
I stand by the point the most underprivileged communities in the whole of the UK all lie along the coast. They are no longer inner cities; they are young people and children in coastal communities all over the United Kingdom.
This is another argument in favour of the focus on rebuilding our economy. I have to say, there will be no support for underprivileged children and young children in coastal communities if we cannot re-start our economy. We have millions who have lost their jobs and savings and thousands who have lost their homes in the years to come. We have to ask when are we getting people back to work and children back to school? It is the children that live in --
Are we not off the question here. Is the government doing enough for fishing and shellfish?
We have economic turmoil all over the country. While we could have short-term support, the coastal communities need long-term support and investment.
Angela.
I think the fishing industry is probably more -- it feels deeply it has been sold out by the UK government when it comes to Brexit. People in the industry say they were quite often held up by the government as, you know, look at this industry, look at the support that we have for Brexit. And they expected a few things within that deal that they thought were going to be absolute givens. They might not get everything but they thought they were going to get some things. Then the deal comes along and they don't even get that. It has led to other problems. The people in those industries are kind of despondent. We're talking a minimum five years before anything could change, and even then it likely might not. I think it is appalling, the level of betrayal, actually, that has happened in that industry. We don't talk about that element of that enough, because it is quite important for those people in those communities.
I'm so sorry, I need to bring Jeane in otherwise we're going to run out of time.
There's a number of things. First of all, this isn't about EU rules; this is about the deal that Boris Johnson signed. It's baked into the deal because he refused to be part of the single market. It can't be changed, no matter what Michael Gove says. And Angela is right, the fishing communities in the northeast have been lied to. That's exactly how they feel. Let's not forget the shellfish industry which is really important in Scotland that has not traded ever since the beginning of the year, not traded at all because of everything they have to go through.
And today in the Scottish Parliament the major exporters in food and drink said Brexit was a disaster, it was making trade really difficult and for some of our young entrepreneurial countries that don't want to send a whole lorry load but want to send part of a lorry load, it is not financially viable for them to do that because of the bureaucracy that comes as a consequence of the deal that Boris Johnson signed. There's no way around it. You can't spin it any other way. It is because of the deal that was signed, the fact that we're outside of a major trading partner is going to wreak havoc on our economy. Michael, you want to deny the people of Scotland to deny whether or not they want to be an independent country.
Do you think it is reasonable for a man taking a digger from the mainland of Britain to Northern Ireland should be told he has got to wash the digger before it can get into Northern Ireland because it's got British soil on it. Do you think that's part of the deal?
That was the deal your prime minister signed. Part of the deal he signed.
Then the deal needs to be undone.
This is the deal that will determine the relationship between an independent Scotland and --
No, an independent Scotland would have the opportunity to be back into that European Union, that large trading partner that we wanted to stay with and had to turn our back on because we're part of the United Kingdom.