Was the UK government right to send Royal Navy ships to Jersey amid tensions with French fisherman?
No, it's an absurd act. Jingoistic sabre-rattling. If you tell me the despatch of those ships and the fact of election day today are unrelated, I can only say that you will believe anything. It is juvenile, it is downmarket, it is not constructive, it doesn't advance the cause of the arguments that need to be resolved. The truth of the matter is the problem flows, as so many things do, from Brexit. It isn't going to be addressed by a kind of Palmerstonian popularism. Frankly, Britain can do better than that.
I'm pleased the situation has eased. The ships have left the vicinity of Jersey. We were right to do everything we can to support the people of Jersey and the fishermen.
How are you going to convince John?
I'm never going to convince John.
The question is about sending Royal Navy ships to Jersey.
We have made clear to the French ministers, who said unwise comments, that we will stand with the people of Jersey. But John is right in the sense this issue now needs to be resolved by diplomacy, by the chief minister and the minister of Jersey with the support of the UK government working with counterparts in France and the European Union.
There is an agreement which covers this issue. It allows Jersey to regulate fishing within its waters and enables them to have a licencing agreement. There seems to be some disagreement about the precise details of that. That needs to be worked through in the usual way.
If you say the way to work it through is diplomacy, the French foreign minister was in Jersey yesterday. Could you not have had a conversation with him?
Ministers have spoken with their counterparts. The Minister for External Affairs of Jersey have spoken with their counterparts as well.
It sounds like a sensible outcome has been achieved tonight because the ships have moved away, the Royal Navy is able to move away as well, although it will keep a watch on events and we are going to ensure this is sorted out as quickly as possible. That's the right thing to do. On John's broader point about Brexit, I'm pleased we have put those issues to bed. He and0 04 / 04 I were in the House of Commons together and saw how paralysing it was for the country. It was right we sorted that out. We did that last year.
Fish exports to the EU, I know this was the French complaining, but fish exports from the UK were down 31%. So when you say you're glad this has been put to bed, this is hardly a result.
I'm glad Brexit, a question which has divided and paralysed British politics for a long time --
You can't be happy with that. Down a third.
We're doing that with respect to Northern Ireland, with respect to Jersey as well. But you're going to see some of the benefits of Brexit. None more so than the vaccine programme which enabled us to roll out one, not the best --
We are getting far from sending Royal Navy ships to Jersey.
It demonstrates the burdonsome of the EU. I'm sure people are glad that Brexit is put to bed --
Let's hear from some of those people around the country. Carlos.
We don't have many details and it will probably be a while until we get them, but from -- it's obviously a failure of diplomacy. It is a terrible tragedy that we're not getting on well at all with our next door neighbours and we've already had to bring the dogs out to face each other off.
Steph.
The French are not very proportionate either. They were talking about cutting power off. That's not diplomatic either. We do need to learn to talk. I think that's been the biggest problem with Brexit as well. We clash too much. We've got to learn to start talking to our neighbours again. We have to get on with them.
Steve?
Turn the question around. What on Earth gave the French the right to suddenly start blockading a British port? The only mistake the Royal Navy made was not sinking the ships in the first place. It is a disgusting thing to have done. To try to justify it by saying we should have been diplomatic, where were they? .
There was an agreement agreed at the last minute. In that Trade and Cooperation Agreement there were problems predictable and predicted. For a start, the protocol on Northern Ireland, that there would be a border down the Irish Sea was entirely predictable and predicted. The fishing problem was also a predictable and predicted problem. While I dividend defending the jobs, I would like to put effort into the 2 million jobs from the creative industries that have been harmed by this.
Hang on. We were was the government right to send Royal Navy ships to Jersey? Were they right to do that?
If they were right, which I dispute, I think it is not a dip the French were in the country yesterday. There was perfectly affirm opportunities. But my point is if they are going to do this, if they are sending the gun ships out for the fishing century, defending the other industries that have suffered as a result of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement.
It is a failure of diplomacy on both sides. It should have been dealt with diplomatically. Who was to blame for sending ships where, it is very difficult to say. Clearly the French behaved badly, whether our response was proportionate, it is difficult to say. It should have been dealt with a long time before it got to the situation of sending out gun boats. There's higher priorities for the Royal Navy than floating around in Jersey. There's what's going on in the China Sea and around Russia. There's much higher priorities. It shouldn't have got to that.
The one thing for the French fishermen is people are at least now paying attention to them. I wonder if Scottish fishermen, who feel so betrayed by the Brexit deal, they might be wondering if they should be taking a leaf out of the French fisher folks' book.
Well, I think when people's livelihoods are put at risk you have to expect them to make a bit of a stand. I do respect that, you know, the British fighting for fishing and the French fighting for their rights. As I say, I think, really, in general, if you can achieve something by talking and negotiation, it is much better than sending gunships around the place.
Amanda?
I was reading about this this morning. It seems to be that the fishermen from France are coming over because they are complaining they haven't got their licences. But they knew they had to get the licences in January. It is no different than we were being told on a regular basis make sure you have all your documentation sorted. I think there was an advert from the government on a daily basis citing that if you trade internationally, your deadline is January, blah, blah, blah. I don't see why the governments in France and Germany and all the others didn't do the same thing. They should have had their paperwork in in time. They obviously haven't. You know, therefore, they can't -- it is just typical French, if they are unhappy about anything they do a blockade for everything. It is just typical of their national -- of stamping their feet and usually getting things sorted. But, no, I think that the French were completely wrong. They were well out of order, and they need to get their own act sorted. They need to do the paperwork and, you know, they can't complain to anybody if they are late.
The French might take issue with that characterisation, I dare say. What they are saying is the new conditions have been attached to the licences which they didn't know about. That's the main gist of their gripe. Deborah.
I wish Boris Johnson would stop getting up in the morning and saying: How can I be Churchill today? It is childish. I think the public of both countries would like both leaders to be grown up. We're not children -- well, we're not children. I think sometimes that's their first response. It is disappointing to the public. It is disappointing to everybody here.
John.
I think there's an important point here. It isn't a question of people not filling in forms that they knew they had to complete. What is at stake is an argument about the behaviour of the Jersey authorities and, more particularly, the British government, in surreptitiously introducing new regulatory burdens and compliance requirements with minimal notice, of which the French fishermen couldn't have been aware.
Jersey disputes that.
It is a violation of the principles and the intended application of the Trade Agreement. That's the first thing. In a sense of backhanded compliment to Robert, whom I served with in the House, it is remarkable through the deployment of his mellifluous tones he can talk about solving a problem when solving a problem means a betrayal of the British fishing industry and its decimation on the one hand, and, frankly, the denial of the rights, very long established over decades and more, of French fishermen.
These people aren't new-comers. They are not new kids on the block. They are not people suddenly turning up saying "Can we fish here?" This is an area in which customarily they did fish. All I would say, Robert, is looking to the future and agreeing with Deborah, if we are going to make progress we don't do it by picking juvenile fights not just with one country but with the entirety of the European Union. If we want to choreograph decent, constructive, convivial relations for the future, let's start as we mean to go on, other than adopting gunboat diplomacy then getting some dovish spokesman to appear saying we know we deployed the boats but we mean well after all. I'm afraid it doesn't wash. On reflection I think people of reasonable sense and judgment can see through it.
The last time --
Can I reply? John appears as the champion of the British Isles but the point of Brexit, or one of the things it achieved is to enable us to be, once again, an independent coastal strait with greater control over who fishes in our waters.
The Scottish fisherman's federation says it is desperately poor. The it leaves them in a worse position.
If Brexit was put to bed, it's got up again.
I don't think that he is fair. There are some things that need to be ironed out. In fairness to John, it will require diplomacy and good relations with our neighbours. We all want to see that. We want to move forward. These are our European friends and neighbours and trading partners. But it does stick in the teeth hearing that from people like John, like Thangam, who did their best to make this issue such a divisive and bitter one for so long. In Thangam's case, voting against getting Brexit done, 40-odd times. John sat in the Chair using every device and opportunity he could --
It is called standing up to the rights of the democratic legislature. I'll introduce you to the subject and a tutorial on the subject would be of great use to the government.
I'm going to move on. There are other questions I want to get in. We're going to hear from Liz Carmichael.
Would a Labour defeat in Hartlepool and elsewhere in the red wall areas mean curtains for Keir?
Whether they're John Lewis curtains or other kind of curtains.
I found it extraordinary that anybody looking down on John Lewis curtains. It is too early in the day to say what is going to happen.
It is too early but, nonetheless, it is looking like you have a fight on your hands.
Every vote we have fought for. We have incredible candidates. I have spoken to voters in Hartlepool, all over the country. People have been listening to the Labour Party, been willing to talk to us.
What's the answer to this question?
It's too much hypotheticals.
Let's take one issue. Would a Labour defeat in heart pool be curtains for ear.
It is far too early to say.
The polls are into the looking positive.
There are a load of results going to be taking place over the next few days. We have worked hard. I think it beho listen very carefully to what the voters are saying. Whatever they say, whatever we get to at the end, which is not clear yet, I think it is important that people have moved away from the disaster that was the 2019 General Election.
I guess you'll find out.
I think in a democracy every government needs a strong opposition. That's good for democracy. We have not got a strong opposition at the moment. I think that is a disaster. I, myself, I don't know what Labour stands for at the moment. It certainly doesn't seem to stand for standing up for the young, hard-working people who have been most affected by lockdown and the underprivileged voter base.
They haven't made any noise about that. We know young people and the poorest in society have been the most affected by lockdown, the most affected by COVID. I don't see Labour making any point about that at all or doing anything useful in that regard. I think that is disappointing. I'd like to see them much stronger with clear views and policies, but I don't know what their policies are any more.
I have to
It is interesting you don't say no, would a Labour defeat mean curtains for Keir. Maybe his position is not that secure.
I think Keir has had a mountain to climb over the last year. It has been a very, very long year. Difficult for everybody. A marred year for everybody. I think one of the things we learned in this election is people are willing to listen to Labour again, willing to talk to us. We'll see what the results are like over the next few days.
Brian.
I think it has been clear over the last couple of years that the Labour Party has faced a battle for identity following Jeremy Corbyn's resignation, we have seen the Labour Party trying to reinvent themselves. As a young person I want to see Labour try to convince me, show me they stand for things, show me they are a party I can put my faith and trust in. The Labour is a party I always want to believe in and trust, but I think they need to convince young voters like myself that they are standing up for us.
What could they say to convince you?
To be honest, I want a vision of some sort. Whether that's on how they can make housing affordable, how they have a plan for effective spending which can help to alleviate poverty within the UK. Just measures they can put in place to safeguard the long-term future of not only myself but people who come after myself.
Bethany.
I would like to echo a lot of what was said. I'm a Labour member and voter. I don't feel -- I feel quite apathetic. In the most recent elections it was hard to go out to vote because I didn't know what I was voting for. I didn't have clear policies. The vision isn't there.
Tony?
I'm just wondering if the Conservatives were to gain seats in Hartlepool and, in particular, in Scotland, would that indicate that the public are more interested in healthcare, education and jobs rather than the rhetoric of Scotland's First Minister and the price of a role of wallpaper?
Deborah?
I really want to like Keir Starmer. He's my MP. I want this vision. I feel really disappointed that his first response to the Policing Bill was we abstain. I know --
We voted against it.
Was his first response not we're going to abstain? He certainly didn't come out with guns blazing. I'm not hearing from him. There's a clause in the Policing Bill that says if you are noisy and annoying at the protest -- deferential we voted
I'm not feeling the rage about that. The definition of a protest is to be noisy and annoying. I can't afford to be crippled. I can't be --
The Labour response was not enough for you?
No. I feel he wasn't outraged. He didn't say it was appalling. His first response was not to say: This cannot stand. All the people going out with Kill the Bill, I don't think he is with us. But I want him to listen and I feel maybe he will. On the up side he seems like a states person, he seems like a grownup. He brushes his hair before he does speeches. That's an appeal for me, as opposed to our current Prime Minister.
That is setting the bar pretty low.
This is where we are, at the bottom of the battle. If you ask me now would I rather have Keir Starmer or Boris Johnson, of course, Keir Starmer, yes, please. But I would love to see more from him on Black Lives Matter, I would love to see more from him on really going out and being in opposition. But I value that he doesn't oppose things that shouldn't be opposed just for the sake of opposing them.
Robert.
We don't know what the outcome is going to be in Hartlepool.
Are you feeling chipper?
It would be unusual for the terms to be close. It is quite unusual for governments even to hold their own seats in --
It has only happened twice.
I was at a -- in 2014 and that was the first time for 25 years. Many factors, not me being the decisive one. William Hague was elected in 1989. So it is unusual even to be close in these situations.
Having been to Hartlepool a couple of times over the course of the last few weeks, I'd say a few things. Firstly, there is a genuine desire for change. Having been represented for 57 years by a Labour MP, including prominent ones like Peter Mendelson. I did find people who want something different. They did look to people like Ben Houchen, the Conservative mayor, also up for re-election today, thinking they were doing a good job, there's investment, a free port, good jobs coming in, taking advantage of clean energy, the investment in town and high streets that we're doing in that part of the world. So they saw a positive change coming. I think, fundamentally, they didn't feel that the Labour Party today represented them. That is a real concern, I think, for Keir Starmer and for the Labour Party because they felt that it was now a party which was solely interested in the most metropolitan parts of the country and didn't speak to mainstream opinion in the rest of the country. That, I hope, we as the Conservatives are offering. I think that is a real challenge for the Labour Party.
Arjan.
I think one of the problems is that there is a lot of infighting in the Labour Party. I would like to see a party that can give some proper vision, some proper ideas of how we're going to come out of the pandemic. Not lots and lots and lots of empty promises to try to buy seats but to try to make peoples lives better. Really, was it sensible to have somebody who was a remainer to be standing in from somewhere which was very much keen on leaving the EU? I think that was a big mistake.
Charlie?
I think we underestimate how difficult it has to be for any opposition leader to get themselves heard while we're going through the pandemic and coming out of it. To judge anyone at this time. You have to give him a couple of years.
I think people like straight answers. Although we haven't seen the outcome, I am very confident from what I've read that Labour will lose Hartlepool. Yes, that is a shock. It wasn't originally to be expected. It isn't really a shock to me, and the reason why it isn't a shock to me is that it is only 17 months ago that the red wall seats revoted against Labour and turned to the Conservatives.
In terms of the question, should that mean Keir Starmer should go?
No. There are two reasons why it is not such a great surprise. The first is that we've had a suspension of normal politics for the 13 months of Keir Starmer's leadership and, indeed, a few days before. In December 2019 people said they wanted to get Brexit done, and the government has delivered on the first phase of Brexit. I happen to think it is the most colossal foreign Policy blunder in the post-war period, but people voted for it. In a sense it would counterintuitive if voters said we know we wanted that in significant numbers, even in Hartlepool, where Brexit party is not standing this time, but actually we're going to punish the government that delivered what we said we wanted them to deliver.
But, very briefly, what I would say is this. I think that Keir Starmer is clinical, forensic, sincere, articulate, but he has to be bolder. He has to reach out to and connect with and cut through to the country as a whole. I think there is a market for a left-of-centre party that can show how it will tackle the levelling up agenda, how it will help the left-behind, the left-out, the left-to-rot. In that sense it is very different from 1979 or even 2010 when people wanted government out of the way. People want a protective state and a Labour Party --
You are familiar what it felt like as Speaker of the House.
Is it curtains for Keir? My more serious point is I thought I heard every type of letter used to describe recoveries and revision, but recently I have been hearing about K-shaped recovery. This means through COVID and through the pandemic and coming out of it it appears that the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, as a huge generalisation, but it is very, very true. What we have seen is that schoolchildren, students, young people have been hammered by school closures, university closures and so forth, and industries in which young people work, the retail industry, the hospitality industry, have also been absolutely hammered by COVID and the recession. Who knows how many jobs will be lost in the end but it is almost exclusively in the younger part of the market, low-paid jobs.
I would like to see the opposition -- I would like to see the government do it, but I would like to see the opposition who have stood up for those younger people trying to make their way in life, I would like to see somebody stand up for them. I think that's what Labour failed to do. At no point have they said: We stand for these people who have lost out.
Except we have.
Labour have done nothing.
That is simply not true.
You want to respond to Hugh, but what about Bethany and Ryan there. Bethany was a Labour member, and Ryan wants to vote Labour and they can't see a way to do it.
I understand that. I hear what is being said.
It must be very depressing for you.
I think it is important that politicians learn to listen. I have to say, a lot of the country, in my view, I think it was the majority of the country, wanted us to do things in the national interest for the last year and take a constructive opposition approach, which is what Keir has done. He has opposed the government many, many times. We have opposed the government on school exam results or free school meals in the holiday. We have stood up in support of people with low income, those in the private rented sector where I have called for the eviction ban -- we then have --
You weren't in position when I quoted.
I was in position from 5 April.
Let's not get too hung up. The thing is, Thangam, you can list the things, but when you have people saying -- Hugh maybe never would vote Labour --
I have in the past.
That's good to know. But it is not cutting through to him. You can list these things but to some people that is not coming across. .
I completely get that. I know that Keir has a vision. I know we want to rebuild our economy. We want to build a better country to grow old and grow up in. I have ideas about how we can do that. For instance, on the housing agenda, we have a great team who cannot be able to cut through more. I hear what people are saying, that it is not cutting through. I get that. It is a lesson for Labour we are going to have to take into account.
Andrea.
Thanks, Fiona. Should pubs and restaurants be able to fully open now?
Obviously, Hugh, I'm going to come to you first on this one.
Well, as people know, we have been fighting very hard to try to achieve this. It was very disappointing that on the day when we received the High Court decision that the case was academic because there wasn't time to hear it before 17 May --
Everyone may not be familiar with the court case. In brief outline, remind everybody what it is you were trying to do.
We were seeking a judicial review of the decision to delay opening of hospitality. As I say, unfortunately, after an unexplained two-week delay from the court, the judgment was that it was academic because it wouldn't make a difference before 17 May. I can tell you, it's absolutely not academic for the 3 million people who work in hospitality.
The other thing SAGE said in the same report was the data collected offers an opportunity to understand the environments where people spend time but does not give definitive notification on where, when and how transmission considered.
Andrea, you are supplying food to the hospitality industry, aren't you?
Yes. So I work for a fresh produce supplier in Scotland. We are the largest in Scotland and part of the supply chain to hotels and restaurants. The rules are slightly different in Scotland than England. In Scotland we are allowed to serve food inside with no alcohol up until 8 p.m., which is ridiculous. What we are seeing is in about 10 days' time people will be able to go to indoor concerts, up to 100 people. But what we're seeing is maybe four adults cannot have a meal indoors and have a glass of wine with their meal. It is ludicrous. It is absolutely crazy. The business owners all across the UK have adapted their businesses to make sure there are safe places to go. They have worked really hard to fit in with the guidelines. This industry is literally on its knees. Businesses are closing all over the place. We have to get it moving as fast as we can.
The government said it would be driven by data not dates. The next day opening up in England is 17 May. The data is looking very favourable. Why can the government not open up sooner in hospitality?
You're right that the data we have seen is very positive. The Prime Minister said that himself. It looks as if we will be able to move forward with the next stage of the roadmap on 17 May. There's nothing at the moment that would suggest we're not also able to move forward on 21 June with the next stage of the roadmap.
But to Hugh's point --
It is right to stick to what we created. You gather the data, you ensure there is a five-week wait which gives enough time to have the information on which to make an informed decision, then you have time to make the public and businesses like Hugh's. No one is saying this is easy. None of us would want to have these measures in place for a day longer than is necessary, but I think it is right, having done so much -- I mean, having all these difficult decisions to be cautious at this stage in the process. We are trying to do everything we can to support in England and the rest of the United Kingdom where we can the hospitality sector. If you think through what we've done, we have the business rates holiday that's continuing, we have grants up to £18,000 --
The fact is they want to open.
We're spending billions of pounds getting high streets and town centres up and running as well. We are doing everything we can to support those businesses through a very challenging period. But it would be doing the country a disservice at this stage to rush rather than waiting a little bit longer. There is nothing that we can see that there is going to be a delay. It is literally a question now of 10 days until most of the aspects of the economy will be able to reopen.
At the moment only 40 percent of hospitality venues are able to open. Certainly in England. Thangam, do you support the sticking to 17 May or do you think it looks so favourable now we should open up sooner?
I think it is a tragedy for the hospitality industry and the wider creative industry, destinations, that we're in the situation we are in now. I wish the government had been driven by data throughout this crisis. If they had they might have heeded their own commissioned report warning what might happen in the winter without certain measures taking place.
Given that we are where we are, do you think that we should be opening sooner as Hugh would like to see or do you think we should be sticking to 17 May in England?
I don't have access to the information, but I think it is better if we had been driven by data. That would have helped the hospitality industry.
But what people are talking about here, the suffering in businesses, the loss to young people's jobs, they haven't all been protected. I heard the Chancellor himself back in February say we can't protect every business. We haven't had an approach which said which businesses were viable, how can we support them.
Faced with a pandemic you cannot protect every single business and every single job.
Say that to the people who lost their jobs.
We have done the furlough scheme. We've done --
Say that to people who lost their jobs.
We are desperately sorry for them. But we have done as much as any country in the world. It is all well and good for you, with hindsight, to say we would have done it differently. The world's most extensive package of support.
Left out adequate sick pay for people told to isolate. People who can't afford to take time off work when told to isolate without adequate compensation. What about the 3 million self-employed --
We have provided support for the self-employed.
There have been so many that haven't been able to. You know there have been many people who haven't been able to afford to do that. You know that.
The adage we should be driven by data not dates has been turned on its head. In this case, as explained by Hugh, the reality is that we have been driven or at least the government has doggedly and dogmatically been driven by dates, irrespective of the emerging data. It is a minor but significant scandal that the SAGE report was leaked out at the last minute after the conclusion of the case. Although Hugh put his point forcefully, I think it should be emphasised that, really, Hugh and his colleague lost the case essentially on a technicality about the unavailability of sufficient time to determine the matter before the 17 May. What I say to Robert is none of the facts that you've adduced about government support programmes is going at this moment to be disputed by me, but what I would very politely say to you, Robert, looking at it in human terms rather than government statistical terms, is this: The sector has 3 million people working in it. It owes 2,000 million pounds in unpaid rent at the moment it can't pay and it is losing 200 million pounds not a week, not a month, not a year, it is losing 200 million pounds a day. The proposition that I put to you is while you sit in ministerial offices and reflect and commentate on what the future might hold, businesses are going to the wall. Fiona, my own view, for what it is worth, is one should look at these issues on a case-by-case basis. I'm extremely cautious and apply --
Let's not stray into that.
On this issue, I think Hugh is right and I think the sector deserves relief and support.
One point of fact. The reason to stick to the dates that we've talked about and why that doesn't conflict with the data not dates point, is that it takes talks five weeks to gather the correct data so that you can make the most informed decision. That's the point that the minister, Chris Witty, our experts, review the data in the knowledge of all the facts, make a decision, then provide sufficient time for the sector to provide for whatever the outcome is. That is why it is better not to rush and make a decision before you're armed with all the information.
Hugh.
I'm afraid that's incorrect. Contrary to what was said earlier, we do have access for the data. The roadmap, the way out of lockdown, was based on three models, three principal models. The assumptions behind the models were published, I'm pleased to say. What we can actually see is that in all respects the data has consistently, from the end of January, been better than those models. For example, if we take vaccines themselves, which has been a tremendous achievement by the country, which is now being squandered, we can see the assumptions that we used in those models and we can see the uptake amongst the vulnerable was much greater than the models assumed.
We can see that the effectiveness of preventing effectiveness in severe disease was better than assumed, and it we can see the transmission of people vaccinated is better than the models assumed. We can see the number of cases has fallen faster than the models assumed, that the number of hospital admissions has fallen. So we had enough data a month ago to see the assumptions behind the models were wrong from the start, from the outset were based on bad data. As soon as the real world data start coming in it proved unequivocally that those assumptions were wrong, yet the government has not changed its position, has not followed data rather than dates. It has been hung up on dates. All the while, since at least 8 April, it has been sitting on a report from SAGE saying that hospitality wasn't even responsible.
Deborah.
I'm a comedian, I would love to be standing in front of an audience having a wonderful time. As a dual citizen, I'm Australian. They have had 900 deaths in Australian. Just over. They have a population of 26 million. Commensurately, we could have had, say, 3,000 deaths here. Maybe, okay, we are densely populated so maybe 6,000. What have we had, 126,000 deaths, something like that.
127,000 deaths.
That's disgraceful. That's an outrage. We had this hokey-cokey lockdown of no, we're out, we're eating out to help out, now we're staying in to avoid dying. All of the confusion. It feels like now it is relevantly safe, we're locked in, but at Christmas we were all out when we weren't vaccinated, none of us were vaccinated, we were all out eating out to help out. It has been such --
We weren't eating out to help out at Christmas. It was earlier.
We were let out a bit at Christmas.
Do you think hospitality should open now or not?
I don't know because I'm getting my information from this government and they are the absolute worse. I wish I knew. But I look at Australia, at New Zealand, I say it could have been done and it could have been different. Yes, we did very well with vaccines, but why are people voting for the Conservatives in Hartlepool? It is a mystery to me. They are looking at the last bit, oh, we've been quickly vaccinated. You must feel really awful about 126,000 deaths as somebody in the Cabinet.
Every death is one too many. But the point we're at now -- you are almost making the government for the government's roadmap. People want certainty, they want a roadmap they can have confidence in and that is what the roadmap is providing.
We managed to achieve it so far thanks to the success of the vaccine programme. 35 million have had their first jab but there are 18 million adults in the country that -- that's going to take more weeks. We need to show a degree of patience, be cautious, and get through the remaining stages.
Why do you think Australia has had 900 deaths?
There are many different reasons why countries have responded differently. Now isn't the right time for us to make comparisons. They have not been good comparisons in the past.
When is the right time?
Once we are through the pandemic. If your point is let's hold an inquiry, let's do that once we are through this. The government is focused on the vaccine programme, recovery post-pandemic, sustaining people's jobs. Tackling the backlog in the Health Service and public service.
One thing one week, another thing another week.
John, are you saying --
What I'm saying is follow the --
Don't talk at the same time or no one will hear either of you.
Robert, the reality of the matter is that the government have stopped and started, gone hither and I do not know, broken its promises, misled people, it has been a catalogue of ineptitude on an industrial scale therefore I can well understand, Robert, why you are fighting shy of a full public inquiry. But a full public inquiry there should be. A full public inquiry there will be and when that full public inquiry takes place, we will see an unsparing spotlight on just how much has been done so badly over such a short period.
I am going to move on. I want to get one more question in which quite a few people wanted to speak about. Charlie.
Just quickly. Do you think that the pitch invasions by the fans at Manchester United will contribute to a change of power towards fans or will they ultimately be ignored?
Robert.
Well, the government acted very swiftly when the plans came forward by the bosses and the owners --
For the European Super League.
I think that was absolutely right. It goes against all the spirit of the game. It would have destroyed the game.
Should fans have more power?
I think fans absolutely should do. We're doing a review led by Tracy Crouch who people will know is one of the most independent-minded members of Parliament. She has been thinking about this for a long time. I've got confidence the government will take forward the proposals. We need now a shift in the fundamental power dynamic in the game away from big billionaires back to the fans. Because football is part of our heritage, our culture, whether that's the biggest or smallest clubs.
Do you have the power to make that happen or will you just talk about it?
There's a lot of things the government can do. We can pass laws, we can regulate the game more. You saw from the decisive action the Prime Minister and Culture Secretary took that we do have the power to intervene and to make things happen. I'm pleased that we killed that proposal and I hope we can use this as an opportunity to make the game more dynamic, more democratic and more in the interests of the fan who ultimately -- that's what the game is all about.
I'm glad that the government has heeded the call of my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Sport. We have been calling for many a long year for fans to be in charge of what happens in their clubs, as they are in other countries. I think we need to see this followed through now, not just a convenient sound-bite at election time. It has to be followed through.
Hugh?
Well, look, I'm not an expert at football but some years the dynamics in top sport have been changing very dramatically so that the money that flows into these clubs rather than coming from the immediate fans in person has moved far more towards the media rights, sponsorship rights and all these other rights that they manage to sell. This has become a much more important source of income for all these clubs than the fans themselves. In a sense, something like this was always bound to happen. I think it is good that it has come to a head now because the -- you know, the people, both the players, the managers, the owners of these clubs, they need always to remember that ultimately they are dependent on the fans. They are there to play sport but they are also there to entertain. And I'm actually pleased that it has come to a crunch.
But I think it has been coming for some time because of the move away from what you take on the gate to all the media rights. I think it is a good thing and it will end up being better for football even though it has been a sad episode.
Let's hear from the audience.
I'm not a football fan but I certainly celebrate any shift of power to the people. What shocked me was hearing the Prime Minister say that he understood that anger. Boris, doesn't he understand the anger behind the Me Too movement or even the anger over the Northern Ireland protocol? I am shocked that he didn't just blank it, disapprove of the violence.
It is never going to happen. There's too much money in football. The people who own the clubs have so much money, the people who sponsor it have so much money. If fan power wants to happen, these big boys need to go out, play in their Super League in Europe, and teams need to be recreated where fans can have a relationship with the players who play for them. As it stands now, not a chance. Too much money. Can we see it coming back? I don't think so.
What I will say is that I have loved seeing British people so politically engaged. It is politics. There is a sense of power -- you know, power to the people. And they got something shifted. I just wish we would all engage that way.
I understand how important football is to people. It really, really is. I'm not saying that the NHS and housing and schooling is as important as football because I don't want hate Tweets. But it is up there, surely. Wouldn't it be great if people were as engaged or more engaged about those things because it clearly works. The European super league died a death as far as I can make out on Twitter because the people didn't want it. What else could we ask for if we went to this government and said: We're not having it.
Becky.
I think it is an interesting point for a Tory minister to make that there needs to be a shift in power yet there are other examples of where there needs to be a shift in power. How do you feel that is possibly when the rights of people being able to protest is being attacked?
If I have time I'll come back to you on that.
John, I need to let you answer this question. Is there any way that the kind of German model could be seen here, where the fans are the majority shareholders in the club?
Yes, it could be. I'm glad you are familiar with the German model. It is a commendable one. I look forward to what the review finds. I agree with Robert, she is a seriously minded and independently-focused person. Frankly, I think that the very principle of competitive sport was brutally violated by these big billionaires meeting in solemn and conspiratorial conclave and plotting the takeover of the sport on the basis you pay your admin fee, you get admitted and never get removed.
Let's not forget some of these billionaires have stumped up the money for the players.
That's a sore point. I'm an Arsenal supporter. My particular bug bear is if you are going to have billionaires involved, and I would like to see much greater fan control, it would be a good start if those people cared a flying flamingos goal about the sport of football. The problem with Stan Chronicy, whose temerity, whose audacity, whose cheek, sheer chutzpah beggars belief, me doesn't know one end of a football pitch from the other. He is based in the United States, never comes to the UK, and my message to him is the same as Ian Wright's, Stan Chronicy, get out of our club.
I admire in other clubs people who stand up to be counted. I hugely admire Ian Wright, Gary Neville and the rest. They led, the fans have put a terrific protest and this time this protest must persist until it prevails. As Robert said, the government does have power and wouldn't it be a good thing if this time around it used that power for the benefit of the public as a whole.
Our hour is up. Football is something we could talk about for a long time. It is talked about a lot in my own household. Ron, forgive me, we're out of time.