Are those food shortages in supermarkets since 1st of January, teething problems with Brexit or are there are much deeper issues with the Irish sea boarder customs protocol?
Do you want to kick us off?
The protocol was brought in by Boris Johnson to try to get Brexit done. By doing so, it separated Northern Ireland away from the rest of the United Kingdom, something we warned about. Since the protocol came in, there have been difficulties with like steel, which we have worked to get sorted out, with pets’ travel, parcels, a whole range of items. We warned the prime minister about this which is why we voted against the withdrawal agreement. We said it was going to cause great difficulties. It arose because of a skewed understanding of the Belfast Agreement. What is really important to Northern Ireland is the trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, both ways. So it is important that we deal with all of the issues in the protocol. The prime minister said recently he will use Article 16 if necessary, and that means he will take unilateral action to protect the citizens and EXHURMS which citizens of Northern Ireland and we would urge him to work Ireland and we would urge him to work with us to make sure there isn’t damage to the people and businesses of Northern Ireland.
You are critical about the protocol but you did describe the renegotiated protocol as a serious and sensible way forward.
No. I don’t think I did. What I said was -- that was back in objecting when we were saying in 2019 that it was important that the Northern Ireland assembly had a say in those matters. Of course he decided not to those matters and it was just around SPS and animal checks at that time. What we have at the moment is a who will range of protocol actions causes damage to Northern Ireland and, of course, which is not what we were talking about in October 2019.
Anand, teething problems or deeper issues with the protocol?
It is a combination of things. Partly teething problems. Some of the problems we are having will be overcome. It is a question of traders learning how to use the forms, fill them in, but there are other factors that come into play. At the moment we have a series of grace peers for food imports into Northern Ireland Northern Ireland. That ends on 1 April. It will get harder again, more delay at the borders. At the moment we are dealing with a period of much reduced trade and travel because of COVID. So the real test of this agreement is going to come when we come out the other side of the pandemic, trade which travel come back to closer to their normal level, at which point it is only then we’ll be able to judge. But we shouldn’t expect things to be the same as before 31 December. What Brexit means is there are checks between Great Britain and Northern Ireland and that is going to mean cases it might mean shortages.
In terms of teething problems, you have conclusion like John Lewis who are not shipping from GB to Northern Ireland. Is that something that will be ironed out or have to live with.
I can’t speak to specific cases. Of course there will be some traders for whom it is not would get it to trade with Northern Ireland. One of the things to watch over the next 12 months is for pharmaceuticals we have a graze period of 1 year --
When you say grace peered you mean checks that do not apply now.
Of course you are dealing with sending pharmaceuticals into the EU single market. Now it might be some pharmaceutical firms decide, actually, the size of the market means it is not worth complaining with the EU regulations. That’s what Brexit was all about.
Michelle.
: I would remind viewers that the majority of people and elected representatives in the north are opposed to Brexit. We can see the outworking of that and certainly from my assessment it is very clear that what we’re witnessing is a trade adjustment shock. It is clear that the British government didn’t prepare or work with businesses in terms of them being ready. I think that’s a big thing in terms of operational readiness being able to trade.[DONE] Obviously the deal went right down to the wire so there wasn’t time for businesses to prepare. When you look at what we are experiencing, it is a direct result of Brexit. I think it is nonsensical for some claims which I heard, particularly from Brandon where he said this is a direct result of COVID, when we all know it is because of the fact that there’s not a readiness on the British end in terms of being able to adjust to the new trading appearance. Now there has been some solutions found to a number of issues over the course of the last number of weeks, something I very much welcome. There have been tariffs on steel been imported into the north, obviously there’s a big manufacturing industry here that depends on that. So I’m glad to see some solutions, but clearly this is the outworking of Brexit and we’re going to see a lot more of that. My job as a political leader will be to uphold the protocol and ensure it is implemented in its entirety and to find answers to problems.[DONE]
I want to hear from the audience. Liam.
Do the DUP regret voting against Teresa May’s option?
More questions from the audience. Darren. [Darren]: What are the rules for pets going between Northern Ireland and Scotland or England or Wales? Because it seems to have become quite difficult.
I presume you have your dog behind you in mind? [Darren]: Yes.
A personal issue for you. Let’s come to the main question first of all. Are the food product shortages teething problems or deeper issues with the Irish Sea border customs protocol?
I think there’s a range of things going on. I think Michelle knows what she says is not quite correct. The point I made, and I made it clearly in the House of Commons yesterday to the Select Committee in and in oral questions, at the beginning of January there are a number of things happening at the same time. Businesses made commercial decisions before the deal was done, actually before the protocol agreement was made, which was a bit earlier in December. Before the deal was done. That’s a legitimate thing for them to do. They made those decisions. One of the supermarkets, that’s why you’ve seen different branded products. It seems they made a commercial decision on that. There was an issue with COVID. There was no doubt, not just in Northern Ireland but the Webber ministers have referred to this in Wales, even people in London have had an issue with the fact some food supplies have been affected by the problem we saw at Dover just before Christmas. That has an effect on what we have seen in food shelves. Businesses in Great Britain particularly getting used to the new systems. Now the reason the protocol is there is what it allows for is products moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland, some of which move into the Republic of Ireland are due to have tariffs because they go into the EU from the UK.
So that is as a result of Brexit. Nothing to do with COVID. Let’s be clear, that’s nothing to do with COVID.
I never said the problems are just because of COVID. It is just not because of the protocol. They are dealing with the new systems in place because we have left the EU. There are companies getting used to -- I think you mentioned John Lewis. There is no reason John Lewis can’t send parcels to Northern Ireland but the guidance came out on 31 December.[DONE]
[Unreportable cross-talk.]
There are a range of things happening at the same time. The point I made in the first few days of January, the judgment of the protocol and how it is working will be best made when we are a few weeks if not a couple of months down the line, and through COVID.
You say a few weeks. We are three weeks in it. But in terms of the protocol and the differences it has made, the prime minister said in December there’s no question of there being checks on goods going Northern Ireland to Great Britain or Great Britain to Northern Ireland. Because if you look at what the deal is, we’re part of the same customs territory. No question of there being checks, yet, if you want to ship something like mince, for example, from Great Britain to Northern Ireland, you have to fill in an Entry Summary Declaration, a Simplified Frontier Declaration, a DVA mass goods reference, an export health certificate -- I could go on. There’s several other certificates here. If they are not checked, what are they?
I would have to see the wider quote.
It is pretty simple. No question of there being checks on goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. So he was wrong there. He’s not right, is he?
The the point we made Northern Ireland businesses will have unfettered access as part of the UK. That the protocol does deliver. From products move from Great Britain into Northern Ireland, particularly with SPS checks --
Sanitary and phytosanitary food, meat and animal products.
I’ll let you pronounce that bit. But also because we recognise and we have done for a long time the single epidemiological unit of the island of Ireland. There have been checks since the 19th century. That’s what we built on. We have built on that for those kind of products. Now this is partly to ensure that Northern Ireland businesses and Great Britain actions moving products to Northern Ireland staying in Northern Ireland get to do that tariff free. Obviously we have to make sure that they have that ability, unlike goods that may be moving to the Republic of Ireland where tariffs would apply.

It is a lovely little dog.
Don’t try to curry favour. Answer the question.
At the moment, yes, you do need to have -- at the moment the Northern Ireland chief is allowing flexibility, particularly for guide dogs, things like that. What we have categorised as is a Part 2 partly the EU. We want Part 1. So Part 2 needs we need vaccination certificates. We need to get that improved. We need to agree this with the EU to get that up to Part 1. There’s no reason not to be because we are a completely clear island in GB and Republic of Ireland, completely clear of ray rabies. It is one of the things we need to get fixed. Absolutely.
COVID will have lessened the disruption we could have seen at the ports as the protocol kicked into place because we have seen less freight. The hospitality sector --
There has been a problem of freight moving out of the UK.
There’s also a significant drop in the amount of freight. And because the hospitality sector is closed in Northern Ireland as well, clearly that means we’re not seeing as much traffic at the port. So he is absolutely right in saying that the real impact and disruption will be seen over the c go weeks. We have to make the changes these trading arrangements work because the protocol contains two important principles. Firstly, it was negotiated in order to avoid a border on the island of Ireland, but, secondly it contains the principle it should have a minimal impact on the every day lives of communities in Northern Ireland. That’s just as important to the Belfast as avoiding the border. We are seeing the consequences through rising prices, shortages on supermarket shelves and disruption. The roots of this are the denialism, which has been the hallmark of this government’s approach to Northern Ireland from the beginning of this Brexit debate. You just quoted from the prime minister who last year and the year before told Northern Ireland businesses they could rip up any paperwork they would be required to fill in, no trade controls from --
That was going Niall to Great Britain.
That denialism, that dishonesty has denied actions and communities the times they needed to prepare all of last year and the opportunity to make this work. If this government truly wants to be a government of the whole United Kingdom they need to be honest about the challenges facing Northern Ireland and take forward some of the practical solutions we have suggested to make this work and deliver long-term solutions to the problems that we’re seeing.
Philip. [Philip]: To the Secretary of State. You keep insisting even tonight, and I’m unclear if you’re backtracking that you don’t count it as a border down the Irish Sea. If it’s not a border then, what in fact is it?
I’ve never seen it as a border down the Irish Sea. I think what the petrol --
What is it then? Just to answer the question. Checks have to be done before you cross it.
There have been SPS checks in one form or another since the 19th century. We are not putting in new customs infrastructure. There isn’t that kind of a border there. What there is and what there is forrence Britain moving products into Northern Ireland -- Northern Ireland has unfettered access into the UK market. For Great Britain-based businesses, yes, there are deliver things they need to do. If they are moving products into Northern Ireland. We ensure they are not subject to tariffs that they would be subject to if they were moving into the Republic of Ireland. That’s what those pieces of work are about. It is ensuring that Northern Ireland businesses are not penalised with tariffs they shouldn’t be paying.
Do you want to come in.
That struck has to be built because under the terms of the protocol if you are shipping things in from Great Britain to Northern Ireland there needs to be checks on the SPS products. The Northern Ireland Executive is going to have to find a way of putting those things into place. It is a slightly anomalous situation where you are having these kind of checks within a country. It is a slightly unusual situation at best. You can call it a border or not as you please, but those checks will be there, they will be real and affect the nature of trade between GB and Northern Irel.
: I think the DUP are the outlier in terms of the Brexit peace and have hitched their wagon wrongly to the at other times from the outset of the Brexit discussion. We are with all the challenges that we have. But I will say this in terms of the Executive approach. While we disagree absolutely in terms of Brexit itself, we want to minimise the checks. It is clear for all to see there’s infrastructure at our ports to deal with the SPS checks. That was an essential part of the agreement that has been reached. Much be said about the protocol. The protocol is a protection because the reality is also that throughout all of the Brexit debate what was very clear was the fact of the about the was very much on an English agenda not in the best interests of the people who live here. We sought the protection. The protects has been delivered in the terms of the protocol that prevents an -- Orr supports the all-Ireland economy, prevents a border on the island of Ireland but crucially protects the Good Friday Agreement. I have to say that time and time again I’m no longer astonished in terms of the British government to owe who have tried to run roughshod over the Good Friday Agreement. They legality to breach it, in fact. felt the pressure from the United States in terms of trade deals and potential trade deals in the future that they rolled back on that. So the only security, I think, that the people of the north have is in terms of the protocol. As I said my job as a political leader is to try to minimise the disruption. But I will be looking towards the EU that there is full implementation of the protocol and it is protected.[DONE]
Sorry. Sorry. I just want to let Arlene in. You heard what Arlene said about hitching your wagon to the wrong horse. Also the question for the audience. Do you regret now not going for the Theresa May deal, ending up with a protocol you don’t like?
The Theresa May deal and the backstop envisaged in that, in the words of the attorney-general, would have been with us together. At least with have an opportunity to debate that in four years’ time. The Theresa May deal left us in the EU customs union. At the moment we’re in the United Kingdom customs area. So, I mean, I think that is important to say that. The Theresa May deal, and I know people have talked about this, including George Osborne over this period of time, but the reality is Theresa May couldn’t even convince her own party to go with her deal never mine the Democratic Unionist Party. So it is important to say that it would have left us in the EU customs union as well. Let me take up the point about the Belfast Agreement. That is there for the protection of both communities in Northern Ireland not just one community. It is not just about north/south relations, it is also about east/west relations as well. I think, unfortunately, the United Kingdom under Theresa May fell into the trap that was led for them by the Republic of Ireland that the Belfast Agreement was about no borders on the island of Ireland, but we can have a border internally within the United Kingdom. It is offensive, it was not what was envisaged by the Belfast Agreement. That’s why we have to try to not only minimise it but get rid of it. It is offensive to the United Kingdom constitution and we need to deal with it in the proper way.
Thomas. [Thomas]: I wanted to make a quick comment. My wife and I would shop between Lidl’s and Tesco. What we found since 31 December is Lidl have been much better stocked than Tesco. The first week Tesco had nothing and we had to depend on everything in Lidl. Lidl had been so much better stocked in terms of meat, fruit and veg. I don’t know what they are doing differently but it seems not to have affected them as much.
I know Lidl were saying they were preparing for two years. They will be thrilled with your endorsement, I’m sure. Clearly other supermarkets are available: Chris.[DONE] [Chris]: I wonder to what extent these little hiccups at the port are actually happening. From my point of view, an end-user’s point of view, I have no point when I go to the shops, they’re fully stocked. If I go to buy fuel it is fully stocked. I purchased by email three items recently, including these headphones, a new doormat and boot polish.
All essential items, Chris.
: They are. They are everyday items. Every single drop of fuel comes into Northern Ireland, unless I’m correct, they come from refineries in Great Britain. I haven’t seen any shortages at the protocol stages. No broken down cars for lack of fuel. Industry has not stopped. It is all working as far as I can see. So, yes, there are problems that need to get sorted out. How much of this is being hyped up in the same way that remarijuana said: Owe this will happen, that will happen. There will be massive queues. The only thing on these islands was the approach to the ports at the south of England when they were trying to get across to Europe and that was caused by Covid-19.
Emma. [Emma]: I would like to make a comment on behalf of small businesses. I run a business park at Mallusk. We have about Hough businesses. I speak with them day and daily. A number of them ship out to Great Britain and receive stock in from Great Britain. All of those who do are experiencing massive delays in receiving stock through or the administrative burden is proving closal for their staff. So I thought I would like to give them a voice this evening and say that the problems are very much real for our businesses in Northern Ireland, for a small business community.
We hear what you have to say. Thank you very much. I’m going to take another point but Darren, what do you have to say. I think we dealt with the dog now, if you have anything else you want to add. [Darren]: The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, when was the last time he went around a supermarket in Northern Ireland and what did he see?
I’m not sure how interesting that is. Unless he went post-January --
Because of restrictions I have not been since Christmas. The point I was going to make after Michelle was pretty much the point that Arlene made. Those clauses we were talk about we were able to remove because the EU when we got the agreement on the petrol removed some of the requests they made which would have breached strand 3 of the Good Friday Agreement. Arlene is absolutely right. Those causes were about. I do take Emma’s point. I would say, and this links into the point I think Thomas might have made, it is important that businesses, and I appreciate small businesses are focused on running their businesses and doing their day-to-day work. One of the things they can do is deal with the Trader Support Service. It is free, the government is paying for that. Some of the companies named tonight who have worked with that have found no problems at all. They respond to 99.7, I think it is, percent of all calls and deal with the issues within 15 minutes. It is a really good service and I would encourage all businesses, particularly small businesses, to do that. The government picks up the cost of that.
Another question from Thomas Clark. [Thomas]: Deaths are still rising in our hospitals. In one day 1,800 recorded yesterday. Is this lockdown enough?
Louise.
This week we learned that the UK has the highest death rate in the 7-day death rate in the world. That’s an absolute tragedy. That’s tens of thousands of families that have lost their loved ones. That’s not the fault of the dedicated nurses, carers and health care workers who have been risking their lives throughout this pandemic to protect ours. It is a result of the poor decision-making at the heart of this government. 10 months ago I came on this programme and I said if the government didn’t take action to increase statutory sick pay and make sure people could afford to self-isolate they would live to regret it and we would too. 10 monthslat advisers are still telling them self-isolation is not being it and they are still not taking action. It is over a year that testing measures were at the border. An effective public health response like test and trace are still not effective. So I’m afraid to say the measures that they’ve taken, the slowness going into lockdown and the speed they lifted some of these restrictions have caused voidable deaths. It was foreseeable and throughout this pandemic it has been completely foreseen.
I think every --
Do you accept anything of what Louise says?
It is a tragedy when you lose lives. I suspect everybody by now knows somebody who lost somebody to COVID.
What about the delays?
A couple of things I would say. First of all, the 7-day average, it is difficult to -- it is difficult to do a operative untilly at the most of them because you at analgesic and demographic differences around the world and there are different variants.
What you can’t dispute is it may be impossible to say at the moment on this particular day the United Kingdom has outperformed -- I’m trying to think of a better phrase to use -- the rest of the world in terms of the number of deaths, i.e. we have done the worst, but we are among the worst. No doubt about that, is there? This is what Louise is saying in terms of delay.
I think when you look at where we were in terms of where the R number was, it was low. What we have seen, particularly with the new strain, it is so virulent, all the decisions all way through this have been led by the scientific and medical advice we’ve had. We made the decisions based on the medical and scientific advice the government has had from SAGE, the Chief Medical Officer. Even when you look at -- if you take the point around international travel back in March last year what Louise just referenced, the WHO’s view was that wasn’t necessarily the right approach at that point in time.
Five weeks after SAGE adviced you to take that circuit breaker.
In Wales the circuit breaker didn’t work. I’m not sure that’s the right point to be making. We look at the R rating, we look what is happening around the country. I’ll what the tier system is about. Looked at what is happening in different parts of the country. Even within the UK, one of the reasons we worked across as four nations, Scotland and Wales Northern Ireland, England, with the devolved authorities looking at what is right for them, which is right, there are difference across the country, but with the new strain we all moved together because it is so virtual.
James. [James]: Arlene, do you regret vetoing the two week extension just before Christmas that could have potentially saved more lives?
I was going to come to you Michelle. I’ll come to you first, Arlene.
This has been an incredibly difficult time for everybody across Northern Ireland and I think we have been learning as we go in terms of how we deal with Covid-19. Of course, it has changed direction, changed course throughout all of this. As you know, in the Republic of Ireland they had a five-week very harsh lockdown before Christmas, then they found themselves in a worst position than we are at the moment. So, you know, you can look back with hindsight and say you should have done this or that but we’re dealing with a virus that changes direction, and what we took the decision on at that point in time was listening to the voices of the medical advice of course but also the voices of those people who had not been able to open up their coffee shops and hairdressers for four weeks. They were in dire straits. So we gave them an opportunity to open bear in mind the fact it made .05 difference to the R at that point in time. I believe we did take the right decision at that point in time.
We all, as government ministers, will be looking back on how we took the decisions and there will be plenty of time for reflection over the coming years, but at this moment in time what we’re focusing on is saving lives, protecting hospitals, protecting the NHS, and making sure we have enough capacity in our NHS to deal with these issues. At the moment we’re at the very peak of our hospital capacity issues. It is why our health minister felt the need to ask for military assistance this week. He has asked for 110 medics to come across to give him that assistance. I think that’s the right decision. I’m pleased we have that capability to ask for that assistance in Northern Ireland when we get to that pinch point. I think we are working together in the executive. Of course, as a five-party coalition there will be bumps along the way. Every jurisdiction, every administration has had challenges, Fiona, during this crisis that we’re all facing into. But in a five-party coalition that had just very recently come back together again, I think we have worked well together and we will continue to do what is right for all of the people of Northern Ireland.
Michelle the question is is this lockdown enough. Today in Northern Ireland you extended the lockdown to 5 march.
: I think there will be a day of reckoning for thetory. Particularly at the outset of the pandemic when they had a herd immunity policy.
They always denied that was their policy. They have always denied that was their policy, Michelle. [Michelle O’Neill]: Of course, among many a thing but that’s my assessment of the approach. I ask from the very outset the World Health Organisation was clear in terms of rapidly responding. They were very clear in saying there had to be test, test, test. It took longer to kick in. But in terms of our own approach in the executive, we are five different political parties from five very different political outlooks. I have no doubt everybody around the executive table is there to do what’s right for people. They are there to work in the public interest. Five parties around any table to make decisions on all the different things that we deal with in politics is going to be challenging at the best of times, but for a fledgling executive only reformed after three years of political hiatus, I think this was a huge challenge. So there will be reflection on our own approach as well and I think there’s plenty of time for us to do that. But as Arlene has said, this is going to be the toughest week for our health service in the north of Ireland. So at the onset of the pandemic, when we were predicting what could be the worst scenario and explaining that to the public, and the public would rightly feel this is not going to happen again. Unfortunately that is what happened now and we’re dealing with the worst time that we’ve been through the whole way through the pandemic. So we’re very focused today again on extending our measures. Unfortunately we’ve extended them for another four weeks and potentially that could go on into Easter. So our focus has to be on how do we support the businesses that were discussed, that they’re experiencing all the implications of lockdown, the disruption to business, to trade. How we can support individuals to do the things that Louise talked about. How can you ask people to isolate if you’re supporting them to isolate.
There’s lots of hands up. Julie Anne.
I am a frontline health worker. I work in the emergency department. I would like to ask about the vaccination schedule for healthcare workers. We received the Pfiz vaccine, the first dose, but the second doses have been delayed for 10 weeks which is against the manufacture’s guidelines. following the evidence, is that it would be safer for us to have the vaccine as it was designed and have the second dose at three weeks. Can you ensure that we’re going to get a second dose? As frontline health workers, we feel we need to be protected as well.
I’ll come back to that. Just a few more questions first.
This new lockdown, the politician who travelled to Westminster after travel restrictions, how can the public be expected to follow the rules if some MLAs think it is okay to travel over to with him the, sit on local trains, don’t bother to wear a mask or don’t adhere to what us, the public, are supposed to be
Helen?
Given the extension of the lockdown, I wonder how much is being done to implement this lockdown. My perception is that the roads are as busy as ever they were. I see people in the shops. I see people congregating together who are not -- people congrea together quite apparent. In terms of the wear in terms of especially talking about it moving on to Easter, what is being done to ensure that people are following the rules. If they’re not following the rules, then it’s kind of what is the point in keeping on extending things for longer.[DONE]
Karl, let’s hear from you.
I think we all underestimated how far-reaching COVID was going to be for our everyday lives. I suppose, thinking about it at the time, that the three-month initial lockdown was going to sort things out, I think that was a big mistake and when it comes to this time now that we’re in, I think the people are suffering from lockdown fatigue. When the administration or when the government is asking people to do things they think that it’s possibly one rule for certain people, another rule for other people.
Elizabeth?
: Hello. Good evening to you all. I’m concerned with the extension of the lockdown, the effect this is going to have on our young people, our children. Taking into account health and safety, educational social advancement of children and their mental health, which is undoubtedly suffering, is it in the best interests of our children to continue with closures?
Anand do you want to come is the lockdown too damaging, the central question is is the lockdown enough.
There are encouraging signs. Behind the horrible headlines about fatalities, there’s a sniff of good news that the rate of infections might now be coming down.
We’ve had another survey that it may be going up.
There are contradictory numbers out there. What I would say is the [DONE]imperial College study is scary on the it doesn’t tell us whether or not the cases are going down from December. There is other evidence that suggests from December cases are going down. So there is a tiny bit of light. I think we should also say to date the vaccine programme has been remarkably successful. A combination, if lockdown is having that impact with vaccine being rolled out effectively, you can see a way in which lockdown could work. But we’re going to have to stick with it for a long time. I do think after this, now is not the time to do it, we are going to have to have a public inquiry. We have to think about how we organise ourselves as a society. We run our leaflets hotly every winter. One of the lessons of this pandemic is we might need to think more about resilience, less about efficiency, so we have capacity to spare should we end up in this situation again.
Let’s get an answer to Julie Anne’s question. Arlene, I’ll start with you. Can you guarantee that she is going to get her second dose and when will she get it?
This is something we discussed very recently in relation to the fact that this evidence was coming out the Israel that the dose should have been given within the time period initially thought about. I understand that the chief medical officer, chief scientific officer are speaking to the Israeli about what we are being advised. We are not scientists, not doctors, so we take our advice from our chief medical officers and scientific advisers and they are saying to us that the first dose does give you a certain amount of protection and that protection alongside all of the other measures in terms of social distancing, wa our hands, doing all of the that first dose then the second dose will be administered. In terms of Northern Ireland, our care homes, I think it is 80 percent of our care home residents have received the second dose of the Pfeiffer vaccine. We are pleased about that. will give them the protection they need. In terms of our vaccination programme in Northern Ireland in terms of the number of people per head of population who have been vaccinated. I think that that has worked very well with both of the vaccines. Making sure we use the Pfeiffer vaccine in the appropriate way then our GPS rolling out the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine as well.
Another question from Liam.
: A border poll is likely in the near future. Should this be taken more seriously now.
Michelle.
: Absolutely. I think the conversation we started talking about tonight in terms of Brexit and the implications of Brexit, one thing for sure Brexit has become a catalyst for many, many people entering into the conversation about the constitutional people. It will be the people alone who decide the constitutional future. One of the things that has made the issue even more topical is the fact that the EU have said in the event of a successful referendum that the North automatically would go back into the EU with the rest of Ireland. I think that becomes a stark question for many, many people now to consider do you wish to be part of that narrow, English, inward-looking Brexit Britain or do you want to be something better which is inclusive, outward-looking and within the EU in terms of Ireland. So I think there is a conversation now that needs to be had and we need to not fall into the same traps of the Brexit debate before with there was a lot of false information, misinformation, a lot of information that wasn’t there for people to consider and make the right choice. My position is certainly now is the time to plan. Now is the time to have the conversation. No one has anything to fare from the conversation. I don’t see any contradiction in being in the assembly, being a joint leader with Arlene in the executive whilst initiating and being part of conversation around constitutional change which is what is built in the Good Friday Agreement. It is the people who will decide. I think the conversation is now an unstoppable conversation. So let us all enter it with our own standpoint. We all come with our own view. Arlene will argue the other side. I have described this as the decade of opportunity and I see George Osborne is talking about the opportunity in the time ahead. I think that even Arlene’s colleagues, one of the MPs actually joined in the chorus with Peter Robinson, the former leader of the DUP, now is the time to enter into this conversation.
George Osborne also talked about in terms of sadly he didn’t think none would care outside Northern Ireland. Brandon Lewis, a border poll is likely in the near future. That’s Liam’s point.
I would argue the opposite. If you look particularly at what the protocol offers, taking the point about getting everything working smoothly, as part of the United Kingdom Northern Ireland will have a unique competitive advantage in the world in the sense Northern Ireland has the ability to trade in and as part of the United Kingdom as well as through the single market with the EU. If you are a business who deals with the United Kingdom and the EU, the place to invest and grow your business is in Northern Ireland. It benefits from that being part of the United Kingdom.
Are you not concerned, as far as goods are concerned, in that Northern Ireland is in the market for goods, frictionless trade with the EU is a lot more straightforward for Northern Ireland so it pushes them a little bit closer to Dublin?
No, because you have unfettered access into Great Britain as well. So you have the ability to trade both ways. That gives Northern Ireland a competitive advantage. A huge opportunity. Once we come out of-COVID, I appreciate. We have seen over the last year over 3 billion pounds of support that Northern Ireland has had as part of the United Kingdom. But all of us in the United Kingdom are important. I disagree entirely with George Osborne. This matters for the whole of the United Kingdom. We are stronger because we are united. We are four nations working together. I think COVID had been a really good example of that. Equally, where I do agree with Michelle, and the point one of the DUPs MPs was making just today, and it fits in an article I wrote earlier this week, nobody should be stopped or afraid of having a conversation. It is right will discuss these things, particularly in a centenary year.
So you welcome the conversation about a united Ireland.
I fully respect everybody -- part of the point of having peace and what has been delivered through the Good Friday Agreement is we can have these debates in a proper way.
But not a referendum.
I might entirely disagree with Michelle. I will make the case why Northern Ireland doesn’t just benefit from the United Kingdom, the United Kingdom benefits from Northern Ireland being part of it. As I say, we’re in the cent triyear. It is a chance to promote what Northern Ireland has to offer around the world.
Lessly. What would you like to say?
I would like to make the point regarding the discussion about a united Ireland or not, as the case may be. Can I ask Arlene and Michelle, if those discussions don’t go well, are you going to argue the point out and then throw your teddy I didn’t say out the pram again in another three years?
I heard you say if they don’t reach agreement will they throw their Ted I didn’t say out the programme because people are I’ll come back to that in a mint. James.
: Brandon it was last week you refused outline, the criteria that needs to be met for a border poll. Can you explain what evidence brought you to that conclusion?
Philip?
: I would like to ask the Secretary of State why he is not advocating and actually giving us examples of what the British government will do to promote the union. From my perspective as a unionist, I would be concerned that we are sleep walking into conversation. It is a conversation that I honestly never thought would needed to be had in my lifetime and I’m pretty sure it now will be. I would also say to our first minister it is probably due to an incoherence within Unionism at leadership level and what does she see she can do to perhaps improve that.
Louise, H I think it is important to set the context for this question and what the last five years have done to the debate Northern Ireland. Because there’s no point denying it has not been a difficult and precarious time for Northern Ireland and I would say for Unionism. Huge debates about the future of Northern Ireland have been had in Westminster and I think a lot of people in Northern Ireland would feel that they are treated as an afterthought in Westminster at times and, at worst, a political football.
Where does Labour stand in terms of a referendum on a united Ireland?
First and foremost, as cosignatories to the Belfast Good Friday Agreement, that is absolutely sacrosanct. That is for people of Northern Ireland to determine their own future. The Belfast Good Friday Agreement held that whatever your aspirations, whether to a united Ireland or to remain in the union, that it is in all our responsibilities to drive progress in the here and now. I think what I heard Lesle saying, that she wanted to see good government and good progress in the hear and now and driving change for people in Northern Ireland. Mo Mowlam always said it was the real lives that needed changing. So I asked all of us the British government, the Northern Ireland executive and other guarantee torsion to The Agreement in Republic of Ireland have a duty to secure that peace into the future. I know the last five years have frayed the bonds of the union and the Good Agreement. I would appeal to everyone who has a stake in Northern Ireland’s future to rededicate themselves to final implementing that Good Friday Agreement.
Arlene.
I think it is important that we see the union for what it is. It is choice. For me it is much more, it is that I’m a no one can take that away from me. But we are in our cent triyear now. When Northern Ireland was created there were many that believed it wouldn’t last very long here we are celebrating 100 years. That is because of the strength of all of our people here in Northern Ireland to not concentrate actually, as Louise said to concentrate on the an everyday basis. If you look at what has happened throughout this past year with COVID, and Brandon talked on this, we have not only received 3 billion pounds in terms of support. The furlough scheme which helped a lot of ordinary people in their working lives, the self-employment scheme, but of course our National Health Service which is very much at the heart of our union, very key to us, the fact we have been able to take part in the UK-wide vaccination programme which has put us ahead of other parts of the world. Even today when we had to call in for military assistance we were able to do that because we are part of United Kingdom. So there are rational, logical reasons why we must remain within the UK, as well as if you look at -- and Brandon made this point earlier in the week -- it is what Northern Ireland brings to the United Kingdom at well. If you look at Queen’s University, it has just been awarded the best entrepreneurial university, beating Cambridge. So we have a strong education system, a great National Health Service, so a rational, logical basis I think people will continue to choose to be within the United Kingdom. It is, of course, under the Belfast Agreement for the consent of the people of Northern Ireland and there is nothing to show that the people of Northern Ireland want to leave the United Kingdom in any of the opinion polls.
Anand, as a consequence of Brexit, a border poll is likely in the future. That’s what Liam is saying.
You have to accept the fact that the Brexit process led to a significant rethink of the UK union not just in Northern Ireland; you see the same process happening in Scotland. So that just seems to be the reality at the moment. For me the priority at the moment is, yes, obviously people should plan because we are living in an uncertain time where public opinion seems to be very volatile. But surely it is to make the protocol work. We are where we are. We have a new settlement for Northern Ireland and while it is legitimate to think about the future I would hate it if because of that we lost sight of the present and didn’t take the opportunity to make that protocol work as effectively as it can.[DONE]
When you hear businesses talking about the reams of paperwork, saying it is a full time job to deal with the new paperwork, much more than they had before, do you feel from your knowledge of the Brexit process that that is something we would be able to put behind us and we’ll get sorted out or it will continue to be a thorn in the sides of some companies?
It will vary on the firms. Some will deal with it, keep on trading. Other firms, small businesses, might struggle more because of the load placed upon them. We shouldn’t kid ourselves that Brexit means trade will continue as it did before. It won’t. It will change. That doesn’t mean that the protocol can’t be made to work for Northern Ireland. It means that government and businesses need to work together to ensure that it functions as well as it possibly can.
A few more hands up. Liam. It was your question, actually.
Just a couple of points. Arlene stated that, obviously she’s British and no one can take that away from her. I don’t think no one wants to take that away from her. I think any referendum is not about taking none’s Britishness away. Anand is saying about the here and now, the key is to make the protocol work in the here and now. One of the key things is you have to plan for this day coming, this referendum because we have to learn from the shambles that was the Brexit referendum and we have to make sure that any unity referendum is not like the Brexit referendum and people have a clear, concise knowledge of what it is they are voting for. We need to make sure. If the referendum isn’t for another 10 years, we need to start planning now.
Michelle you wanted to come in.
: I agree with that point. This is the time to plan. Your plan for change, now is the time to enter into the conversation. I would differ with Anand. There’s no contradiction in trying to make the protocol work, which I’m wedded to, but also the Good Friday Agreement, the peace process and the d/b/a was the alternative to conflict. I voted for it because of consent because that gave me an opportunity to work every day to convince people why the merits of a united Ireland is in their interests. It is delivering ox day-to-day politics, health, education, working together as five parties in the executive but alongside that running parallel to have the conversation about what could a better future look like. Our economy in the north performs poorly in the south of Ireland. Wages are lower in the north when you compare our economy and GTP --
Arlene is shaking her head, I have to point out.
Arlene is shaking her head, I have to point out.
We are having the conversation tonight and the sky isn’t falling in.
It is important to have the conversation but Michelle will want to place it in a narrative of a united Ireland. I’m placing it in the strengths of the union. The fact is Northern Ireland is not just a European leader, in some sense a world leader in our security sectors in Belfast. We have so much going for us in terms of looking out to the future globally as a result of Brexit. One of the reasons why I supported Brexit was to look globally instead of placing it in the strenghts of the union. the fact is Northern Ireland is not just a European leader, in some sense a world leader in our security sectors in Belfast. We have so much oing for us in terms of looking out to the future globally as a result of Brexit. One of the reasons why I supported Brexit was to look gloablly instea of being restrained by the proximity and inflexibility of the European Union. We need to look globally. I think Norther Ireland is well placed to do that, especially with our young people and the talent we have here in the Northern Ireland with the support of the UK government. (edited)
Brandon, specifically what are you doing in order to promote Northern Ireland?
It is a very important question, actually. Just picking up on Anand's point, as I said earlier there are a range of things all of us who believe in the union should be looking at. First, the case why Northern Ireland benefits from being part of the United Kingdom. There are a whole range of things over the past year we have seen. The protocol working as part of Brexit gives Northern Ireland a unique opportunity.