Is the European Union having its sausages and eating it?
Lucy, we're talking about the Northern Ireland protocol.
The issue is that the Northern Ireland protocol is a direct consequence of the type of Brexit that Boris Johnson and this government wanted to have. They didn't want to be part of the Customs Union or the single market or the other options and they don't want to align on food standards and veterinary standards which, if they were to align with the EU, which is what Biden is asking them to do, that would reduce many of the issues that we're seeing around the Northern Ireland protocol.
Exports of sausages and other chilled meat from Britain to Northern Ireland will effectively be banned at the end of this month because they are not coming from within the EU.
They are subject to a lot of checks and the Prime Minister said that the Northern Ireland protocol was ingenious and would not result in checks or barriers or border, but that's what we are seeing and in effect there is a border down the Irish Sea.
What would you do differently?
Well, what we are saying, which is what Biden is calling for, the British Government should align with the EU when it comes to food standards and veterinary services and that would get rid of most of the issues that we're seeing because the Government said they want high standards in food safety and so on, so there shouldn't be any problem for that.
One of the reasons that the Tory Party were so against this issue of alignment was because they thought that would stop them getting a trade agreement with the US. Well, of course, now that we've got this change in administration, we are seeing a change in tone. The Government need to get on with it. They need flexibility and compromise because the EU can be absurd sometimes as well, but there is a way through this if the Government is prepared to take it.
Yanis, you have got an extensive experience of dealing with the EU. Is the EU having its sausages and eating it? Is the EU being difficult or the Government having signed up to something that it didn't understand?
London and Brussels are behaving like spoilt brats. Boris Johnson has to confess that the price of ending free movement of people is that he terminated the free movement of sausages between Britain and Northern Ireland. He has to acknowledge the impossible triangle as I call it. You cannot simultaneously have a regulatory divergence, no border within Ireland, and no border down the Irish Sea. You can have two of the three. You cannot have all three bodies. At the very same time, the European Union has been misbehaving, on the one hand yes, they have the legal right to inspect every great British banger that travels across the Irish Sea, but to do this, is an abuse of their legal right.
We have seen that already with the President of the European Commission trying to cover up her own vaccines procurement fiasco by banning exports to Northern Ireland. Maybe this is the sausage war or crisis we had to have so that some common sense prevails. Both sides have to accept that they have to work closely together so we might as well do this harmoniously.
Frank, what about Joe Biden's role in all this? After all, he is the American on the panel. He has come over here. There has been lots of briefing beforehand that he will try and bang heads together and get some kind of compromise?
It bothers me because America has been too loud and too involved in too many things that it should leave to the UK and Europe. We had a president for 4 years. I mentioned to you that I was lucky enough to see Mr Trump just before he left office and I walked up to him and I asked him, "What does the J in Donald J Trump stand for?" You know what he told me? Genius. The US needs to remain quieter and let the UK and the EU sort it out.
Do you think Joe Biden should play a role in that?
He should play a role in compromise and common sense, those are the roles that America should be doing going forward, but they should not be dictating policy. They need to speak less and listen more.
I know you're resident in the UK for many years. Show the audience your shoes that you put on this evening. You can just stick them out the side.
I actually took it off.
This is Frank making the point here. This is a British story. I love the UK or who is my favourite rock band, it is one or the or the other, but for Roger Daltrey, here you go.
Sausage wars, we heard Lord Frost saying we under estimated the effect of the protocol on goods movements to Northern Ireland, effectively saying the Government didn't understand what it had signed up to and it is having to deal with it.
To trade agreements are complex...
When you say it is the difference between what we say.
Let me get it out. They have the legal right to inspect every sausage. They probably have the legal right to open every packet and inspect every sausage. Is that reasonable? Is that necessary? So what happens when you put these things in place and sometimes they take a bit of time which is why we had this period to bed things in to get some of the practicalities out, but what happens is there is many things you have. You get trusted trade status. We know that sausage is staying in a supermarket in Northern Ireland and it is going to a frying pan in Northern Ireland. It is not going to the EU. You get sensible practical solutions. We have had the period of time which was supposed to iron out some of the technicalities, and what happened, they are using the legal right to basically make it impossible almost to get these goods on to the shelves in Irish supermarkets...
This is not something you saw coming, not according to Lord Frost anyway?
You wouldn't expect there would be a harsh implementation that you wouldn't get things on to the shelves of supermarkets. They are concerned this is a back door into the single market. I understand that they want to keep the single market protected. We are talking about goods going from the EU to Northern Ireland. Get around the table, we haven't got time now. Time is short. Let's get some sensible approaches so we make it easier for these things to be exported and we all want the same thing in terms of the Belfast agreement, the settlement...
Kavita is desperate to come in.
What surprises me, you say we didn't understand what we were signing...
I didn't say that.
Lord Frost... In business when we're two parties, we sign agreements and once we signed on the dotted line, that's gospel. Okay, that's gospel. If we didn't understand, we seek legal counsel at the time, and I think what is happening now, obviously the Northern Ireland protocol, I don't know the detail, it overrides the Belfast agreement and that's why we're having these issues and obviously it has to be worked through, but from a business perspective, you have to look at what you're getting into and we've got into that now.
No wonder, you know, the EU, like you said Yanis, are behaving like spoilt brats and we've got contentions over in the UK, but those agreements were signed and those agreements are there now. So I'm going to be interested how we navigate out of this now and I feel sorry for the people in Northern Ireland and the peace there because it will affect peace there. It is bigger than sausage wars.
Let's hear from our audience.
Once upon a time our word was our bond. We did it at the last minute, maybe there wasn't enough thinking. What other problems are we going to have from the Brexit agreement? If we sign an agreement we should stick to it. If we haven't done the homework to work out it is a sensible agreement, then we have to work things out. I am afraid this mess is very much about getting Brexit done as quickly as possible without thinking of ramifications.
Martin.
I question whether or not animal welfare standards are below the EU's standards. Is that the Labour Party's position?
We have high standards in this country so we've got nothing to fear from alignment with the EU. We've got those high standards and, in fact, it is the Government's ambition, I understand, to kind of raise those even higher. So I don't understand why we are so fearful of that when it is something that won't scupper a trade deal with the US and would enable the free-flowing movement of sausages and other goods.
Does that answer your question, Martin? Is this something, forgive me, Martin, I don't know if you voted for Brexit or against Brexit?
I voted for Brexit.
Is this how you thought it would turn out in terms of Northern Ireland? Are you happy with what you see?
Northern Ireland wasn't my biggest concern when I voted to leave the EU, but it is something that is becoming a bit of a dog's dinner. The Government really do need to get control over this, for all types of exports of Northern Ireland.
Sherry.
We're renowned for being a bit petty. They came up with a rule that you couldn't sell a banana because it was the wrong shape.
Well, there is some conjecture, I don't think that's actually true, but it was written up a lot in the papers at the time, but as it turned out, it was not true.
Another bit of fake news.
Tony.
It is a nonsense. Nobody is suggesting for a minute that the chilled meats coming from the mainland to Northern Ireland are in any way unsafe. Come on, EU, accept the fact that Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom and let's get round the table and sort it out. I mean, the people in Southern Ireland must be appalled because it must have an impact on their free movement as well and free trade. These things can all be sorted out if there is a willingness on both parties to get together and address it with some common sense and move on.
Gillian, what are we expecting to see? The mood music coming out of the meetings between the EU and the UK at the moment is not particularly harmonious.
We have been there before.
The UK is threatening to unilaterally increase the grace period...
We have been there before.
Therefore, not to ban sausages and other chilled meats going to Northern Ireland. Is that likely to happen?
One of the things that I've learnt, these agreements are nothing like any business agreement that I did in the 30 years I was a commercial negotiator...
I'm not surprised. It was undoing a trade deal of 40 years.
I've read tonnes of these things now. They're written in a different level. They're written at a very different level so you can get these things started and then they evolve over time. So, it does need to have good faith and good faith negotiations and discussions. They absolutely require that. Now, we have been in this position before where there has been a bit of a leverage play, it goes up to the wire, it seems to be what happens, but hope with President Biden urging some sense as well that we can come into the room and have a sensible -- it isn't actually rocket science to sort it out. If there is trust and will, you can come up with solution. As Tony said, nobody thinks that the sausages or meat will be swarming into the EU and upsetting some balance of trade or that they're going to be unsafe. Neither of those things are true, but they are deliberately at a different level which is something I found interesting when I started to work in politics as opposed to business.
I'm going to take a question from Hannah.
Hi. With the exponential growth in case numbers in the north-west, should the country extend the lockdown, use local restrictions or unlock as planned?
Well, as you say, Hannah, cases are growing in the north-west and growing much more slowly across the rest of the UK. Kavita, extend the lockdown, use local restrictions, unlock for all?
So, a number of prospectives. Right from the start, for business, obviously it has been really, really challenging from the start. In business, you have to be driven by the data. Any decision-making is always driven by data and statistics. And I think right throughout the Government hasn't been the best at managing and looking at the data, making those decisions and, you know, last week, we've had 7500 cases which has been the highest since March. Now, I know that we've got less hospitalisations, vaccinations are there.
Do you think we should unlock on 21st June...
For the younger population, my concern, what my concern is, I've got a 21-year-old and I've got friends who have got 21-year-olds who have got long COVID, so for me, we should be careful about the restrictions. We should have localised restrictions, because we don't want to go into a full-blown lockdown again and I think we still have to think about health. Health is wealth. We've got to navigate through this.
Local restrictions would be the way forward.
Absolutely, yes.
Lucy, as a Manchester MP.
I'm not for local restrictions. We tried that before and it didn't work...
Given that it is so much worse in the north-west.
We had it much worse last time and we were ahead of the curve, if you like, last time round which is why I think that some of the measures that are now being brought into Greater Manchester and Lancashire could and should have happened many months sooner, vaccine surges and testing surges, doing a lot more to enable people to get their second doses, doing a lot more on that long tail of, we've done really well at quick vaccinations of the willing and able, but those that still haven't had their vaccines, but are in the qualifying groups, we need to a lot more to get those there.
On 21st June?
It is mainly younger people who are getting the infections. The vaccine is working. Those over the age of 65, the number is almost flat in that, and hospitalisations as a result are much lower and are quite different to what...
21st June?
What I want to know about 21st June, we would like it to happen. I always thought that the whole idea of a big freedom day, of a massive unlocking was a misnomer and has raised expectations in the wrong way, but what is the Plan B if that is not going to be the case? I've not heard anything about that. I don't know what economic support is going for businesses that would still have to close. I don't know what we're going to be doing about the rising infections. In Greater Manchester that's having a massive impact on young people at school. There is a huge disruption now because it is racing through secondary schools and colleges. Businesses are having to close because increasingly staff are getting pinged by the app and have to stay at home for 10 days and so on and making business unviable. So, in the event that we do unlock, what's the plan? The case that we don't unlock, what's the Plan B and what would be the terms under which further restrictions would ease later on?
Okay.
We have an absence of leadership on that.
Gillian, I'm sure you can answer all those questions. I'll come to you in a minute. Beth.
We saw the last time when there was varying local restrictions with nobody knowing what was happening and people leaving London before Christmas and going back up. It is an infectious disease that's not going to respect the borough boundary where you can't go to a nightclub. I think, ultimately, you need to think about delaying from 21st June to keep the rest of the country safe and to keep young people in the north-west safe as well.
Dale.
Hi there. I think we just need to lift it and we know hospitalisations are going down and obviously the infection rates are, but nobody is going to hospital because that's going low...
Just to be clear, hospitalisations are going up - no, they're going up slowly, very slowly, but not going down.
Okay, Fiona. But again, now we've gotten into a pandemic of mental health with people staying at home and being in lockdown. So, we now need to move from that and we know that we have to live with COVID and that is going to be our new norm. I think we need to lift it and the 21st needs to go back, try to go back to how we were before.
Natalie, what's your view?
I think for me, I live in Manchester and my parents live in Liverpool. When we had the local lockdown in Manchester last time, my dad, who is a taxi driver, said the amount of people that he was picking up from Manchester was so high. So I feel as though going down the local lockdown approach, it is a sort of a false safety because a lot of people won't respect that and will just go somewhere else anyway. So all you end up doing is just spreading the COVID to other areas where maybe it is not as high. I feel as though, you know, we need to continue following the science and look at how it goes and then respect what the science tells us.
Joe?
I think easing the restrictions too quickly could cause us some catastrophic problems. We've got students who are going home from university very shortly. There will be a big movement of people across the country. I certainly feel very uneasy about going into a supermarket without wearing face masks. I will still continue to do so and you can't legislate for other people, and I think, whilst we have a variant on our hands which is demonstrating to be extremely contagious, I think we need to be very mindful of how we manage that. I don't think anybody would have an issue with continuing the restrictions we've currently got.
I think we do have a degree of freedom that we haven't had in lockdown and I think if everyone is happy that it keeps them and their families safe, I think they'd continue to respect that a lot more. So I think we just need to be measured and I think we need to follow the science and I think the Government should really be mindful about over-promising and under-delivering when really they don't - they don't know what's going to happen. Yes, listen to the science is my opinion.
I wouldn't ask if we're going to unlock on 21st June. What about Lucy's plan for if we unlock and if we don't unlock, what is it?
I don't have a plan of whether we unlock. That will be discussed at Cabinet. They will be meeting all this weekend...
They must have met before to discuss it.
The lockdown must be irreversible. The first three stages have gone well and we have enjoyed those freedoms. I was in Liverpool last weekend seeing my parents...
If we don't unlock on 21st June, will there be support for businesses...
Get the evidence and the data and these are the tough decisions that government had to make. We've had to make them all along. There is a lot of people who want to go slower and a lot of people who want to go faster. The impact on business is devastating, the impact on events and the summer events is devastating. There is nothing easy about these decisions. I haven't seen the data. The Government is getting the data. Clearly, we have the furlough in place until September. We've done this before, right, we know what the pieces are. In terms of local lockdowns, what we've basically said we're doing surge testing and we're opening longer. We've got buses, pop-up vaccination centres. We're trying to get more people vaccinated. People are coming forward...
Not surge vaccines.
We have followed JCVI and we have been bang on, and if you look at where we are, we're vaccinating under-25s...
But the impact of COVID on people in Bolton and Greater Manchester and Lancashire who have gone through waves of this now...
I understand, Lucy.
It is greater than for those who live in the far west.
We listen to the scientists.
You don't always listen to the scientists.
I have been through this in the States, don't do this, seriously. They deserve better. We have a situation where Democrats get vaccinated in the States and Republicans don't, because Republicans saw it as being a political issue. This is the one case, I understand that you want to be in government and you want to keep government. This kind of stuff actually makes them confused. All they want are the facts. All they want is the truth. All they want is substance. Please, learn from us. I've...
The problem is the supply of it.
It is growing.
We have not done as well as you have, congratulations. Just on this one issue, don't politicise it.
That's why the JCVI are there.
Yanis.
My concern is that we shouldn't take for granted the capacity of the State or organised society to impose lockdowns. The more we delay opening up, the more deadlines we violate. The lesser the capacity of the State or the Government to convince especially young people to follow the rules.
As far as I'm concerned, especially given the great success of your vaccination programme, unlike the European Union's fiasco, our rate of vaccination has reached 20% of fully vaccinated people in Greece, it is pathetic. Given your success, it is important not to continue with lockdowns, but to invest a lot of effort, money as well, in suppressing the virus, in persuading people to get vaccinated, in tracking and tracing those who are not and, you know, doing the hard work of carrying the population with you. That, for me, is the number one priority for Britain now.
Also give them the evidence. Virtually every doctor has gotten vaccinated. Why? Because they know the facts. They know the information. It is not enough to say, "You should do it." You have to give them facts behind it, that the vaccinations are safer than what we take for the flu and more effective. That you have a responsibility, not just to yourselves, your family and your friends and your community, we have to make the case. They have to know the facts and when they do, they will choose vaccinations.
Public health messaging is very important having worked in healthcare for the last 20 years, it is about reaching communities who don't understand or have the fears, they're going on to YouTube and they are seeing the stories and they have a fear of the vaccine, and those are those communities who are at highest risk, the poorest communities, and those are the communities that we're not reaching. So we've got to invest more into public health messaging. We've got to do that.
It is accessible. There is language barriers. They can't book themselves in. They're waiting for calls still. I know loads of older people who are waiting for a call. We need to put more into the longer tail.
I worked on meningitis uptake and we were working with CCGs and people were going out, phone calls and door knocking. You've got to do these other things.
Black and Asian communities have tripled the uptake since April. Those people who said they will get the jab have gone up 25% in the Muslim communities. The messages are getting through.
Because they have seen what happened in India.
That's definitely true.
Quickly.
I'm going to say everyone who is there right now, I had a stroke a year-and-a-half ago because I behaved badly. I caused it for myself.
Meaning you were living an unhealthy lifestyle.
A very unhealthy lifestyle. I'm so focused on people getting vaccinated because they know it saves lives. They know it works. It is 100% undeniable. So if anyone up there who has the chance, your participants here or anyone watching, has the chance to be vaccinated, please, don't make the mistake I made.
A question from Rose.
How is it justifiable to cut foreign aid in a global pandemic?
The UK has reduced spending. Rose, is this what you're referring to of national income this year? Gillian.
International aid is vitally important. It saves people's lives...
You're cutting it. How is it justifiable to cut it?
First of all, we're one of the biggest spenders in the world and in the G7, the people who are meeting this week. By the way, more than Labour spent during their whole time, they never got above 0.5% through their time in government. Just to put that in context. Just to put that in context. It is £10 billion, which is a lot of money and it doesn't include a couple of things that we've been spending on in the interim that will benefit...
The question is how is it justifiable to cut it?
I was just about to justify it. It was on the tip of my tongue. As well as the £10 billion, there is sings this we've which will benefit the people who need it most. These people who need the international aid. The development of the AstraZeneca vaccine which is one-third of all the vaccines that have been done in the world is that vaccine that we paid for. We that. That's the first thing.
We've put £0.5 billion into covax. That's the second thing and the third thing is we have said we will work with the G7, this is going be to discussed in the next couple of days to vaccinate everybody in the world by the end of next year which will involve us giving some vaccines and re-routing vaccines e set a, we know that. They will be working on the plan. That's on top of the £10 billion which is one of the biggest aid spends in the world and of course, we know why we've made that because we've been investing in all these other things which I think personally will be a greater benefit to the international community - right now the greatest benefit to the international community is to get everybody vaccinated. That's where we shifted the priority, but it is important.
When we've got the Commons speaker calling on a vote for MPs on this issue. Do you agree?
I don't know. There was a lot of streamlining aid.
I need to let the rest of the panel in. Lucy.
It is shameful when we're trying to lead the world and hosting the G7 and other actions that we're cutting the percentage of GDP, lets not forget, it is a percentage of GDP, so when you have an economic crisis as we have had in the last year, that amount reduces because it is a percentage. So it would have reduced anyway due to the pandemic, but the Government have decided to reduce the percentage as well and it does take us below countries like Turkey, like Saudi Arabia, in terms of contribution to aid in this world and I think that is pretty shameful. The only one of the G7 countries to do this action...
We will be second biggest donor in...
We will be taken over by France and Germany because they're not cutting. As I say, it takes us way behind some of the countries like Turkey and Saudi Arabia, and why is it a good thing to do? Because, as we have seen with the Indian variant, what happens abroad affects us at home and if we cut aid at this vital time, in things like healthcare services because it is not just about the supply of vaccines, it is about having the programmes and the infrastructure on the ground to get those vaccines into people's arms, we will see a rise in refugees.
We will see a rise in military conflict and other issues that affect us here at home. That's why we have that moral obligation for foreign aid spending of 0.7% of GDP, something the Labour Party brought in because we had a very, very low base in aid spending beforehand and it has worked for us.
It is not how much you spend, it is how you spend it. Is the impact meaningful and measurable? Do you actually change people's lives and can you prove it through the data afterward? The public doesn't oppose foreign spending, it doesn't oppose foreign aid. They simply want it to be efficient, effective and accountable, so you get more for less, so you actually do what you promise you're going to do and, if you fail, people are held accountable.
It is the worst of all worlds, then. The Government are saying they're only going to cut it this year...
Why do you always attack the Government? They're asking for solutions. This was a specific policy and everything the Government does is correct. No, it's not. If we want to action that, this is my commitment and this is why I'm here in the UK, to make a difference in the democracy. I know how much the US has been destroyed by debates like this. I know that we can't have these conversations anymore without insulting each other.
We haven't insulted each other, Lucy is a friend.
We have a different view on these issues. No.
No one has insulted each other.
Find the common ground and measures rather than numbers.
I understand some of the cuts have been made in water and, you know, and the cuts are temporary, and think about children, the number of children who are probably going to die through this because they haven't got their immune systems and that water isn't sanitised and for me I'm really passionate about women and children. Women aren't going to have access to emergency contraception and all those things and, you know, we're going to have bigger implications, so you know, I think we can get through this.
£10 billion is a lot to spend on those things.
We will hear from our audience, Alex.
I think it is shameful and unjustifiable to cut the amount of foreign aid. We are one of the wealthiest countries in the world and it is right that we give the largest amounts. The wealth that we have in this nation was, in large part, built through exploiting the human and natural resources of less economically developed countries. We should be helping them out at this awful time of the pandemic.
Tony.
Fiona, thank you, and panel. We should stop beating ourselves up. When we look at the developed nations, and one of the panellists got it wrong, I don't think it is GDP, I think it is a percentage of gross net income.
Of national income, yes.
So let's get the facts straight. Don't beat ourselves up. We have been one of the biggest contributors. I think we're in the top five and we bring it down to 0.5%. The majority of developed countries, something like 40 countries, are nowhere near 0.5%, and those countries include USA, Japan, France, Greece, and many, many others who don't come near 0.5%, and we're going to bring our target down to 0.5%, if we add our vaccination programme to the world, it is possible our contribution will go up way above 0.7%. So, I don't think we should beat ourselves up. I think we should check the facts. See what we're doing, add the numbers together and find that we're still a very big contributor to the rest of the world with overseas aid either in monetary terms or in more practical terms.
Richard.
Thank you, Fiona. I think the chap on the panel has got it right. Let's stop politicising this and let's work out what it is that we need to do. Lots of people are putting money into this but what is it we're trying to achieve here? Pounds after pounds and euros after euros and dollars after dollars are going into this pot, and all we're saying is more needs to be delivered. More needs to be delivered. Where is it going? Who is getting it? Let's have some feedback to the good that's being done and maybe we can go to the next step and say let's put our hands in our pockets even more.
Yanis.
The direction of change is all important. You see, it is very different to say that, okay, let's find out whether we should be spending more money on a shelter for battered women in the Sudan or victims of a civil war. It is another to say we have been funding these centres and now we're going to turn these people out on to the street or the dirt, and that's an obnoxious decision to make. This is the definition of a false saving.
I really don't understand what has got into Boris Johnson, by comparison to every other piece of expenditure in the Government. I can only explain this as some part by Boris Johnson's universe or Cabinet, to appeal to voters who always get excited by the thought of defunding bloody foreigners, but if I may say, Fiona, Gillian mentioned vaccinating the world. It is important to look at some very stark numbers. Since the beginning of the pandemic, in March 2020, the G7 central banks have printed $9,000 billion supporting the banking system, quantitative easing. 9,000 billion. The International Monetary Fund 3 weeks ago, estimated how much it would take to vaccinate humanity. Everyone with two doses of, you know, whatever it is, AstraZeneca, or Pfizer or whatever, the total sum came to something like 33 billion. 9,000 billion has already been printed. 33 billion would be enough to vaccinate the world. The G7 Central Bankers should do that tiny little thing that is necessary. A little blip in their, you know, printing presses would be sufficient to pay for the vaccination of the whole world without the taxpayers funding anything.
Becky, you've had your hand up throughout this.
Yeah. I would agree completely with the points that have just been made. I do think it is shameful and I think we're almost forgetting the human side of this. You know, countries are these conceptual things where we put borders and barriers in place and there were wars to try to get more land and power, and there are parts of this globe where there is suffering and people are dying and suffering as we speak, and then you've got other parts where there is a massive amount of wealth. I don't think it is helpful to compare ourselves to other countries and say, "Well, we're doing more than they are so we're fine." Well, they're still suffering, while there is evidence to show that the contributions are making a massive difference, we should continue to make them, plus send vaccines over. I don't think they should be decreasing funding at this time. I think it is ridiculous.
Okay. We've got another question I want to take now from Will. Will Drakes.
Hi, Fiona. Is taking the knee habit actual tokenism or a massive step towards tackling racism?
You are talking about the controversy about the England football team taking the knee and then the booing that came after it and there has been comments on either side saying that it is a good thing to take the knee and others thinking it is tokenism. Frank, in sport this started in 2016.
It changed over time. Initially, I was very hostile to it because I thought it was a direct insult to our men and women in uniform. The whole reason...
Why did you think that?
Because it was done for the Star Spangled Banner. It was done at the start of a football game, and during the Star Spangled Banner, if we were fortunate to have a platform, you should be willing to use it, but we should have a responsibility as well, and if fans want to express their opposition to it, they have the same right. We should be...
The fact they boo, you think is equally valid?
I believe we should be encouraging speech and not limiting it. This is my fear of cancel culture and moving towards woke that we will do a better job if we can discuss it and talk it out and debate it.
It is hard to have a debate in a football stadium.
I don't think any chilling of freedom of speech is helpful to anyone at any time. Simply decide when you want to raise it and what you want to say. I have been having points of discussion. I don't speak at every point. I keep my mouth shut. I'm the foreigner here.
Despite your Union Jack shoes.
I love the United Kingdom, I like it here and I like what you represent. For that gentleman up there who said this is a good country, you know what, you are. You are a great country and you deserve our respect.
Kavita, tokenism or a massive step towards tackling racism?
We have to tackle racism and freedom of speech. Booing, what message is that sending if we're supporting that? We have the statues and etcetera that have been coming down.
In terms of the game itself because there were problems within football and some fans said, "Well, we boo the taking of the knee, but then we cheer the black players afterwards."
There was lots of racism towards players. From a personal perspective, growing up in the 1970s, I was called a Paki and abused on a daily basis at school. Okay. As I got through the 80s and 90s, I felt that happened less. It wasn't a nice thing, okay, and we're still getting this in this day and age and I think, you know, if the footballers, celebrities, have got a platform to raise this, and drive a change, that's what we need. We saw Marcus Rashford drive the change with the schools and he drove a policy change, and we need the Government to get behind this, to drive changes and change people's mindset because we shouldn't be now still experiencing all that racism, because I know what it feels like.
Rose.
I just think it is so important because it keeps the conversation going. That's what the movement is about, keeping those conversations and making the changes that we need to accept that we can all be slightly discriminatory in the way we behave in society and just keep that conversation at the forefront.
It is not about being unpatriotic for taking the knee. It is about learning and knowing what Britain is now and that's a multi-cultural, diverse society where we need to accept that we need to be more tolerant and more respectful to people, and if this keeps the conversation going then keep taking the knee, and I'm all for it and it should reach the point until it is acceptable.
Jo, what about you. I couldn't tell which bits you were agreeing with.
There has to be a degree of respect. It's a very tricky subject. I think people are very loathe to make their comments, as I am now, because you're -- if you disagree with taking the knee, you're seen to be racist. You might not be racist whatsoever.
What's your feeling, Jo? This is a forum to speak your mind. Do you feel that taking the knee isn't something you particularly want to see?
No. I don't think it is. What happened, when it was done initially, it had a really dramatic effect and people stood up and took notice, and now their attention has been got and we have seen it in sports throughout that they've all boycotted social media because of racism.
I think there are other more proactive ways to tackle racism and make statements without taking the knee, and I do think the more we see it, I think it becomes just the norm. It doesn't become something that's a dramatic step change, and I think the sentiment around it, it raises awareness, that's right, but I think people will get tired of it, much like they're tired of woke. Much like they're tired of being told what to think. So I respect that people do it. I understand why, but I do think it is starting to reduce the effect it had in the first place.
Andrea.
I have issues with the taking of the knee. I completely understand the sentiment behind it. Racism must not be tolerated in society at all, but we have got to change the mindset of people. We've got to change how people behave...
Do you think taking the knee is not helpful to that anymore?
Actually, I don't understand what it is achieving. We've got to educate people. We have got to have a zero tolerance towards racism, and taking the knee is great and I absolutely am behind, you know, showing your support for anti-racism. You know how we're re-enacting the situation that George found himself at the end of his life and I'm not sure we should be replicating. We need more education and more actions in society and that's just the bottom line. We need to see more actions.
It did start many years before George Floyd. I mentioned Colin Kaepernick.
She is right. Do you want to make a statement or make a difference and she is talking about making a difference. Bravo to your point.
Gillian.
The key point, we've heard it in the audience, there is nobody who don't want to end racism, it is disgraceful and impactful and discriminatory and we know it still happens today, but what's happening here is this in itself is actually being more divisive. It is creating new divisions...
Do you think, footballers shouldn't take the knee?
People have to make their own decisions...
I'm just asking your opinion.
Whether it is the statues or taking the knee, we've ended up with these things that divide us and united societies are what solve those big issues, they're what solve climate change and racism and they will solve the vaccine situation that we have been talking about, the global pandemic, you need to be united to do that.
So what's your answer to the question, Gillian, is taking the knee habit actual tokenism or tackling racism? Do you think taking the knee is a good idea?
They can do what they want. If you want to say do I think it is symbolism more than action? Of course, it is. Of course, it is, as Frank says, there is a symbol about it. But the most important thing is the action and we have seen it creating division and the people who are booing, most of them would like to end racism. They disagree - there is different things that people are interpreting. There are some Conservative MPs who are against it. Why? Because Black Lives Matter stand for things they don't stand for.
Habitual tokenism is a comment from a Conservative MP.
It is about the Black Lives Matter...
Gareth Southgate...
Some people will think that's supporting Black Lives Matter. I'm sure Black Lives Matter will think it is supporting them.
Gareth Southgate wrote a letter talking about football's duty to wider society...
It was wonderfully written. Applaud his leadership on that point.
Lucy.
I disagree with Gillian on this. The division has been created by those who don't want to have a conversation about the message and there are still those people and those people every day abuse black football players who find themselves on the end of it, whether it is publicly at matches, or whether it is on social media and elsewhere. Raheem Sterling, Marcus Rashford, but they feel fed-up that it hasn't made the progress they want and that's why what Gareth Southgate was saying was so important that we can be and we are a patriotic country that upholds traditions but at the same time demanding progress on issues that blight our society. There are people who want to make this a woke issue or divisive issue, whatever...
Others have talked about statues and all that kind of thing.
I disagree with that profoundly. These are football players who have a platform who got fed-up with the fact that they're on the wrong end of racism, all the time in 2021, and they want to make a stand and it has started a conversation and, yes, of course, it is not actually, you know, making things change necessarily, but it is having that conversation and that's their right to want to keep it on the agenda and I think it is important that it does keep on the agenda.
Yanis.
I think it is actually brilliant that England players are taking the knee, feel the need to take the knee and that some people boo them, that's also fine. I'm with Frank on this.
Why is that fine then? Yanis, let me ask you, why is that fine? There are plenty of people who think it isn't fine.
Probably has traditionally attracted racist, and British National Party people. Of course, this is a small minority, but it is a vocal minority and they can sometimes, they can influence, and in fact good people who are standing next them and joining the booing because they think they are standing up for England. Quite honestly, they think that. I'm all for unity against racism, Gillian, but I'm not in favour of papering over divisions. It is important to have the conversations that we're having and we would not be having it if there was not this kind of division on the pitch.
Back in the 1980s, I used to live in England, then it was considered decisive, the fact that many of us were demonstrating against apartheid when Margaret Thatcher was supporting apartheid and supporting the continued imprisonment of Nelson Mandela. Look at you in the Tory Party. You have been shifted. This is how democracies work. If I may add one vinett. That's my view regarding the crowds. When it comes to individuals, take for instance the young cricketer, the 19-year-old, the idiotic person...
You're talking about Olly Robinson who tweeted or put stuff out on social media which he has apologised, but he has been suspended by the English Cricket Board.
Regarding a young person like that we should embrace him, gently, firmly, but lovingly as well, we should be kind to individuals and therefore, try to persuade and confront them.
That's why the show is so special. This is the best English-speaking programme on television.
We will have you back!
You have got 25 people there who get a chance to articulate whatever they want. You guys have a chance to respond to the public. This is what we need more of. If we had more shows like this, more opportunities like this, there would be less anger and less frustration and less people feeling like they're ignored or forgotten. Your participants matter and that's what we need to do in our democracy and that's what we need to do in business and society overall.
Alex, I know you wanted to come back in.
I'm conflicted about it. I don't watch football. The only time I have seen footballers taking the knee is when it is showing on the news. I used to go to the theatre a lot...
You used to.
I hope to again in the not too distant future, but it would become frustrating if the actors came out and took the knee and it would become a pantomime. I think it is the right message, but wrong forum.
Kavita?
Education and good leadership, how can we work together united to drive that? Drive that education. That's what needs to happen. As you said, you know, some people don't understand what the knee is about. They're not educated enough to understand and...
The Foreign Secretary, Dominic Raab, said it seems to be taken from the Game of Thrones.
He said, "I took the knee to propose to my wife".
I'm not sure he was familiar with Colin Kaepernick either.
I just wanted to make a point. That's the way to go. We've got to educate society.
Hannah.
Yes, there is a very famous Martin Luther King quote, that the biggest stumbling block to freedom is the white liberal. It is who is more devoted to order than to justice, who prefers a negative piece which is the absence of tension to a positive piece which is the presence of justice. So, you may not agree with taking the knee, you may not like it, if that is -- if that's how somebody wants to express themselves, if you want to stop it because it creates tension, are you really fighting racism or are you just wanting people to pretend everything is okay?
No one said it has to stop.
Let me come back to you because you asked the question.
I agree with what Frank and Yanis said and the audience members said. If it is what people want to do to show their support for each other, it is absolutely right. Words like racism stick. I think the people who are booing, I don't think the vast majority of them are racist. I think they are bored with politics getting in the way of sport. So I don't think we can call them racist, but I do think that the individual racist, people who do have to be called out and something has to be done about that. [DO NE]
Would you like to see taking the knee stop at the beginning of football games?
No. Again, if it is what the players want to do to support each other, then that's absolutely fine. It is their right to do it.