Our first question from Tim.
Good evening. The government is committed to 1.4 billion for the schools catchup. Are the government waiting for Marcus Rashford to step in before they sort the rest of the funding out?
Kevin Collins was hired by the prime minister and he would have known the direction of travel. When he came back with the report, which was very, very obvious what it was going to report for quite a long time leading up to it, it's very in line with what all the other countries similar to Britain and our committees are calling for.
Briefly.
Thank you. I'm quite shocked at what I'm hearing. Do we not think this generation has been failed enough? As an employer we're talking about students coming out -- you just said about coming out going to the employment market. You know, we can't fail this generation any more that's already been failed. They are going to be left with the tax bill of this and we owe it to them to put in the right amount of money. This will not fill that education gap for any schoolchildren or anybody in further education or anything else.
Hi. I've got two daughters, one aged 20, one aged 18, second year of University, doing A-levels. The one at university, her experience has, quite frankly, been shafted. The A-level one, ditto. And we've got to a stage where, okay, sometimes that happens. Please don't let it affect other year groups. Let's do something about what we can and put money into those ones that we can actually affect and change.
No, I don't. We have the Indian variant which is now thought to be 50 to 70 percent more transmissible. Evidence comes out today that you are 2.7 times more likely to end up in hospital with this variant compared to the Kent or Alpha variant. And it has evidence of vaccine escape. If you have had one dose of the vaccine you are only 34 percent protected. If you had two doses, you're only about two-thirds protected. So that means the real figure is only 40 percent of our population has had two doses. That means there are millions and millions of people who could be infected by this virus. Now, many of them will be younger and death rates should be much, much lower but many people could end up in hospital. The NHS could be thrown into another surge. We just don't know. So what do we do? I think at the moment what we have to do is watch the data extremely carefully in the next two to three weeks. I think we must devolve power and resources to local public health teams. We haven't given the money and the contact traces that we need.
okay. Shaun.
Jenni.
All right. Let's hear from some other people too. Will.
Tony.
Good evening. I get the impression that Anthony wants to have his cake and eat it. On the one hand he is saying we should maintain a lockdown, then he says in the Far East they manage to continue to boom without a lockdown. So I'm as confused as Jenni. I thought that the vaccination programme was going really, really well. I thought we were on top of this and getting better by the day. Now we're told that, well, this is going to go on forever. At some point we've really got to regain our lives. Yes, we should have learned from what happened in Vietnam. Yes, we should have been wearing face masks much earlier, but I remember early in the lockdowns the scientists were poo-pooing masks saying this disease is transmitted by touch. So the advice just keeps changing. I wish all these people would get together, work out, learn from what others have been doing. We haven't done well but we haven't done as badly as some other countries. Let's move forward, get the population vaccinated, get out of it and move forward with sensible ideas that will allow us to regain our lives.
Anthony.
Hannah.
Peter.
Tony.
Yes. I do.
Jenni.