Thank you, Fiona. Do you think that this pandemic has been managed better by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than it has by Boris Johnson in England?
Kate.
Well, I don’t think it is a competition because every government is responsible with the trust of the people to manage this pandemic in a way that sees the virus suppressed and also trying to manage the other harms, whether those are economic, social or other health harms. We’ve seen from some of the polling, certainly even this week, that, I think, about three-quarters of people in Scotland are satisfied with the way that Nicola Sturgeon has handled the pandemic.
She is handling it better-than-Boris Johnson?
I think it is one of the most challenging situations for any leader to be in. At the very beginning she said we’re going to make mistakes. She has been upfront right throughout with integrity and honesty that things have been challenging.
Scotland has an infection growth rate than England.
We also have the lowest 100,000, those are the figures that matter. Because we suppressed it so low during the summer, schools and universities went back earlier, we’re seeing figures increase which is why early action is key to avoid a complete lockdown. I think that Nicola Sturgeon has done that. Certainly this week’s figures in terms of dissatisfaction with the prime minister in Scotland is very high. It is almost the inverse; 76 percent are dissatisfied with the way the prime minister has handled it. From my perspective, the challenge for every government, not just the UK but across the world, is to suppress the virus, keep the trust of the people and ensure we manage these other harms in terms of the economy or society more widely.
Diane’s question is very pointed. Who is managing it better?
I don’t think you can treat this as a competition. When people continue to lose their lines of business, when people continue to be infected at an alarming rate. But we have to look across the UK there has been a similar approach taken by all four governments. Around the world we are a stranger about this virus, a virus that didn’t exist this time last year. But there have been big mistakes in Scotland and we have to accept that and listen to the advice we are hearing and learn from them. In Scotland we had people testing positive for Covid-19 in a hospital being discharged into a care home. We have to learn from that. Nicola Sturgeon told us there would be a support in September; we’re still waiting in October for that. We have the highest percentage of deaths in the care home setting anywhere in the UK here in Scotland. So no one can claim a success. It is a battle that we are all still fighting. It is one that continues to take lives. It is one we are still trying to get on top of. That’s just the health battle. We also have the economic response to deal with as well.
Are you satisfied with the way Boris is handling it?
There have been mistakes by governments around the world. There have been errors made --
What, the UK government has done wrong.
At some time we’ll say this or that should have been done differently. But I don’t think no one can say what has been the big difference in Scotland. What has the Scottish government done differently from the UK. There are areas where the Scottish government have to learn, for example, testing positive people for Covid-19 in a hospital and putting them into a care home. That’s the worst thing that could have happened.
So with regard to mistakes and Nicola Sturgeon, what is the evidence that the First Minister has used in justifying her decision to crush the hospitality sector and saying the spike has come from pubs, bars and restaurant?
I’m going to deal with the main question. Has it been managed better by Boris Johnson or Nicola Sturgeon? Neither of you want to say and you are at pains to point out it is not a competition. But it matters to people who has handled it well.
Yes. I think it is the wrong question that has been asked because it is not a question of internal comparisons, it is looking at other countries that are doing well. So South Korea, Vietnam, Germany. I think what we have to do is learn from what is working well in other countries. Frankly, I think it would be easier if there was a bit more commonality in the approach across all the countries of the UK.
We saw the advice released by SAGE this week, the advice given to the governments on 21 September. From what we can see, neither the Scottish government or the UK government are following much of the advice that SAGE was giving.
The bottom line is SAGE is looking through the lens of controlling the pandemic. They are also having to balance the difficult tight rope of the miserable health consequences for other people as well, which is the effects of the economic damage -- the unemployment, the damage to education. But I think what we have to do is we need a really clear strategy. I think that has been less visible. What we have to do, frankly, is learn to live with the virus while working on therapeutics and vaccines. We have to get it under control but keep it under control with much better public health delivery.
Lucas.
None of the panellists have been able to answer, really, who has performed better, Nicola Sturgeon or Boris Johnson. Of course it’s a horrendously difficult period for both of them. But why, and can they explain the disparity between public opinion and how they handled it? Clearly, people believe that Nicola Sturgeon has performed so much better.
Grant, you have your hand up.
I just wanted to follow on from what Douglas was saying and Lucas was saying. If both Holyrood and Westminster have both made mistakes there is a lesson to be learned for the UK government in the way the public are perceiving Holyrood and Nicola Sturgeon so favourably.
Select Committee, who do you think.
The numbers are clearly moving in the wrong direction. That’s across Scotland as well as England. My worry is that neither government are learning from the mistakes that were made very early on. The UK UK government, it seems to me, has lost control of the virus. They are losing confidence. They’re no longer following scientific advice. We have not seen Nicola Sturgeon come forward to follow the scientific advice that came through in the way that it did from SAGE. Under the SNP government you’ve already mentioned that we have the highest R rate in the UK. Both governments were far too slow in setting up test, track and isolate or test and protect. And my worry is with those businesses and livelihoods at stake now, if we don’t have a way that both governments are going to learn from what has gone wrong and be honest and open about it and work together more closely, we are going to go into a winter where it will be much more difficult for all of us. That is why Labour has called this week, as you know, for a two to three-week circuit break in line with SAGE advice.
What does that mean, a circuit break? How would you define that.
It would be more along the lines of where we were in May with people staying at home but there can be variations on that because we are further forward. What has been very clear from Keir Starmer is that -- from from the Labour Party is we need to keep schools open. I think that is universally felt, we should do what we can to keep schools open. If we are to have a circuit breaker, the estimate being we could save 8,000 lines of business because we get it under control prior to Christmas and we protect the NHS in doing that. That has to be done -- we listen to. If we delay, as the government has repeatedly, then the consequences will be far greater both in terms of impact on jobs and livelihoods but also on the nation’s health and the number of deaths.
Do you support what Andy Burnham is saying, a Labour man, in terms of he doesn’t want to see a further lockdown in his area, despite what you are saying?
I think one of the critical things is it hasn’t been felt the way the decisions are made and the way the local leaders are involved is in any way near what we need to see. I don’t understand why we have both a UK government that has over many years seen cut to local government, that has made local government less resilient, also the Scottish government has cut funding to local government in Scotland by much more than has been cut in terms of budgets from Westminster. This lack of resilience has made it increasingly difficult. But what we have seen is that local authority, when they have been able to go about track and trace, have actually been doing far better than the Serco and others on who the government is spending 12 billion. Also, the key thing that financial support has to go hand in hand with those restrictions. The government has not had the trust of local authority and local leaders that that is happening.
Ian, there’s a great reluctance to answer the question put. We must try to do it justice. Do you think this pandemic has been managed better by Nicola Sturgeon than Boris Johnson?
I honestly think it is the wrong question.
But it is the question, that is the thing.
Right now we are faced with probably the biggest health crisis the world has ever had. That’s applying across the world. All countries are facing a myriad of problems. I think in Scotland’s case our biggest tragedy was the care homes. I think generally we’re undoubtedly in the first wave restarted too quickly. We tried started too quickly. We now have a huge second wave. With the students coming back in the way they did, I hate to say this, but I think it was a bad decision.
You think the universities should have stayed closed?
Not closed but done online. Perfectly feasible. The real question is what do we do now? How do we keep working at this problem and get past the second wave? That’s what we should be concentrating on. We spend far too much time in Scotland and the UK arguing who is right and who is wrong. We have to make some clear decisions and try to get the next stage right.
Yes, what we have to do to get on top of this infection and that involves tight social restrictions of movement and only then will public health measures work effectively. We have to get them working. The real opportunity is leadership from what has been done abroad rather than having fruitless internal competitions about whether Scotland or England is doing better. They could both do better.
Susan.
Picking up a point that Mr Ross has done, that nothing different was done but that doesn’t equate to the clear public opinion polls as to who has handled it better. So surely it comes down to communication from the two governments, whereas obviously we have very clear communication daily for Nicola Sturgeon and yet not from Boris Johnson. Is that, do you think, Douglas, what the difference in opinion polls is.
I think you’ve hit the nail on the head there. One of the clearest distinctions between the two approaches -- and I think it is important to recognise here here that we had a four-nations approach beforehand which veered off path when Boris Johnson decided to, in my opinion, pre-emptively eased lockdown and have since seen a four-nations approach. I think on your point on messaging that’s key. When 80 percent of people in Scotland said the Scottish government had good communications. 72 percent of people in Scotland says the UK government has bad communication strategy just now. That gets to one of the key distinctions there. More broadly, though, I think one of the key issues that we need to address in terms of our handling of this crisis more broadly is the scale of outsourcing that we have seen throughout this entire pandemic. We are seeing consultants being brought in for a week who are being paid a year’s worth of nurses’ salaries. We are seeing Deloitte, Mackenzie, being brought in, firms looking to maximise profit and do not have expertise in public health are being brought in to oversee how we respond to test, track and trace. Now, that for me is an abject failure. Why should the taxes of key workers, who are trying so hard just now to help alleviate this crisis, line the pockets of corporations who are not experts in public health? So for me, what we need to do, if it is the case that we are recommended to have a circuit break, if it is recommended to have another lockdown, we need to take a moment, step back, reassess our current approach and recognise that public health should be in public hands and use that as the mantra going forward to guide us.
What did you think when we saw today about private consultants getting up to 7 grand a day. Do you think that’s right?
We have to remember the private sector have been involved in terms of generating the ventilation capacity. Right at the start, our biggest concern in Scotland and across the UK was we --
What about the point Miriam is making.
We have to remember that the private sector have worked to ensure --
But the point that Miriam is making, consultants getting 7 grand a day.
I’m not going to -- levels like that but we can’t say the whole of the private sector was wrong in trying to get us -- Susan, and Grant have all made the point, and I don’t think anyone on this Panel has been able to say anything that the Scottish government have done differently from the UK government. It has been a UK-wide approach, it has largely been the same.
Different measures have been taken at different times.
I agree with Susan, it comes down to communication. Nicola Sturgeon is a very good communicator. She is on our television every day in Scotland doing the daily briefings. But when it comes down to the detail, we still have, as you said Fiona, the highest R rate anywhere in the United Kingdom, the highest percentage of death in care homes anywhere in the United Kingdom. One of the highest death rate per head of population in Europe. So there are clear challenges that we have to face. As Sir Ian said, we have to learn from the mistakes we made. We are 7 months into this pandemic now and we’re probably closer to where we were in March than we are at the end of this crisis. We have a lot to go through, to learn from, and we cannot make the same mistakes that have been made before. [Unreportable cross-talk.]
The most important lesson to learn is moving quickly. If we learned anything back in March, it is the quicker you act, the faster you can suppress the virus and get it under control. Seema talked about the need for a circuit breaker. She may be aware we are in the midst of increased lockdown restrictions. We have national restrictions right across Scotland right now. The idea is working quickly and decisively with this two-week period to try to bring the numbers under control. It is that acting quickly that matters.
It is a puzzle, and I’m not sure you’ll have the answer. But if, as you say, Nicola Sturgeon is acting quickly and her communication skills are good, why is the infection rate so high in Scotland?
You are talking about the R number.
It is pretty important.
It is important, but what we look at is the rates per 100,000. That’s what matters. In terms of across the UK, if you look at the figures rising, the prime minister announced his three-tier approach. I’m not sure that will go far enough in terms of suppressing the virus in the way we need to. We’re in the midst of a two-week increased lockdown right now. But it is not just about communication. This requires the public’s consent and it requires political leaders to treat the public like adults. We are dependent on the public following the rules and regulations and understanding the evidence behind it. That is the key to communication. That’s what I think distinguishes the First Minister from the prime minister.
Let’s hear from Toby.
I feel as a young person it is easy for me to answer this question. Nicola Sturgeon wasn’t the one who had a chief adviser break the rules and not be criticised from. From that perspective I think it is Boris Johnson’s whole approach to the pandemic.
Douglas says that nobody can point to any difference. I think he is missing the point, that this is about leadership, it is not about numbers. Looking simply at the numbers, disregards the fact if you don’t have people with you, regardless of how hard you lockdown, you’re not going to get people to comply. You’re going to get people to start to believe all kinds of conspiracy theories and end up with non-compliance. So this is about a difference in leadership, hearts and minds. It’s not about a difference in R rates.
You asked the question. What do you think about what you heard?
I don’t think it was a competition. That wasn’t the reason I asked the question. But I do feel that Nicola Sturgeon has communicated very well. She hasn’t shied away from questions from the press and TV presenters as Boris and his ministers have done. I think she made clear-cut decisions she has explained well. She earned respect from the people. She needs the people on board to follow what she wants them to do. That’s precisely what she’s doing, rather than hiding away like Boris is doing.
I’m going to move on if I may. You’ve had a good go, Douglas, I know.
Just on the quick action of the Scottish government. If I can. It is really important there’s quick action but also quick action for the businesses affected. Kate is finance Secretary here in Scotland and they are waiting 10 days now to get --
A far more generous opinion of support.
They had to wait 10 days to find out they’re getting 40 million pounds. We don’t know how that is going to be delivered [Unreportable cross-talk.] Please indicate, get that money out to businesses. Please.
Let me just, before we do, I want to get another question in. I want to mention that next week we are looking for people to join our virtual audience in Sedgefield, the week after in Lincoln. If you live in the area, please do get in touch. Get involved, we’d love to hear from you. Now to the next question, from Martin Dundas.
When is a café a restaurant and a restaurant a bar? Does it differ in Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast or London?
I have been looking at the regulation. Let’s take a café, for example. You can sit down and eat in a café in Edinburgh but only between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. They close at 10 p.m. in London and in Cardiff and shut all together in Belfast. Mark, do you want to kick us off with this?
Yes, sure. The first thing to say is that this virus transmits in indoor spaces more easily than it does in the outside. The second thing is that, going back to the last question, the numbers aren’t going down because we’re on average making too many social contacts. So we know that lockdown works because when this pandemic started with tight restrictions it did come under control. Restaurants, cafés, it depends, actually, how people are seated. It depends how people behave, whether they are inside or outside. I think that when you read through, and I read through before coming, all the different restrictions, I looked at Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales, it is very confusing, and it is different. The bottom line is we need to reduce our social contacts, and until we get it down similar to the levels we started with, this is not going to come under control. Frankly, we do need to get on top of the second wave and urgency does matter. So we just have to get on with it and I don’t think it is helpful having lots of different hard-to-understand rules.
As a scientist, help us understand. Is it to make sense scientifically that the rules are different in these different areas?
The first thing to say is there is not a perfect science that says -- you know, there isn’t a science that says what a restaurant is or a café. Nor is this a specific science that says 6 people or 5 people or 7 people. What has to happen is that our social distancing has to be maintained. Of course, we are all in this together. Everyone has a responsibility here. But the rules have to be clear and I think the argument for a circuit breaker is it is tough but short. If we can, by a month’s time, get the numbers down, then we have to get testing and tracing on top of it rather than chasing behind. At the moment, although the numbers number of available tests has gone up, it is still chasing demand. We are only going to decrease if we get on top of it. Then we can really focus on outbreak control, on testing in environments where the risk is hiring and testing in the health system. That’s what we have to do.
Your advice would be to shut them all together for a brief period or for a period of whatever length?
For a brief period of time we have to get this under control. There’s no question about that.
Can the panel please explain to me, following on from Martin’s question how the government is going to expect providers in the hospitality sector like pubs and wine bars to be able to pay wages of 20 percent when businesses have closed and transpires no money coming in. It doesn’t add up.
Graham.
Again, increased lockdown the level of differences across the four nations is adding to the confusion. Is it a case that actually it is a rule for some but not for me because I’ll pretend I’m in Cardiff for the purposes of the meeting I’m having or the lunch I’m having. It is too difficult for people to interpret the rules. It is too easy for them to interpret it for themselves. So looking at the SAGE advice and making the lockdown nationwide has to be the way forward.
Colin.
I think there’s a point being missed by a lot of the panel that Mark only just mentioned at the end of his point. The lockdown is supposed to be time to break the chain of infection and give time to bring up the testing and tracing system to a suitable level so that that takes over and bring down the levels. Why are we not hearing enough about that?
Miriam, this is a two-part question from Martin and our audience has thrown in their ten penneth as well. When is a café a restaurant, a restaurant a bar? That affects whether they can open or not. Also the fact it is different in the four nations, do you think it should be one message?
Just now -- well, firstly, there has been confusion about what constitutes as a café and a bar. We have seen that elsewhere in the UK.
We are hearing Robert Jenrick in the UK government Cabinet saying if you are going to eat food in a restaurant or in a café in the UK, in certain parts of the UK now or in a pub, rather, that they have to serve a substantial meal. Could it be a pasty? It could be if it had a side salad. If we’re dealing with that level of complexity, it is difficult to navigate.
Whether we would have nationwide in the sense of a UK-wide lockdown, the practicalities of that would be very difficult now for all four nations because we’ve all gone in different directions. I think what we need to do now is listen to the public health advice and follow what we’re asked to do there. On the point on hospitality, there’s a point being overlooked here as well, which is that hospitality -- and I say this as somebody who worked in the industry for a long time -- is an area that is very, very insecure at the best of times for workers. We have seen a lot of zero-hour contracts, a lot of precarious employment in the whole sector already. With this pandemic, as with so much of it, what it has served to do is not only create new vulnerabilities but expose fractures in our economy that already existed. The furlough scheme was mentioned there. I want to touch upon that. What we have in replacement for the furlough scheme is much better than the cliff edge that they were looking to do. It is still deeply inadequate. Parts of it cover areas in lockdown and we’re still asking people in many circumstances to make a cut to their wages. Are they getting cuts off their rent, their bills, their food? No. What I would like to see is a roll-out of the initial furlough initiative that covers not only areas in lockdown but also other areas so we can help sectors that are to remain closed for the foreseeable future. My last point on hospitality, when we emerge from this crisis we need a new deal for workers. This has exposed vulnerabilities that have existed far too long. We need to ban zero-hour contracts, root out precarious work and have a real wage for all workers in the UK.
Do you want to jump in Ian?
I’m going to -- with the same point again, there’s a huge big challenging problem out there and, frankly, we’re talking about not unimportant issues but not primary issues. I think there’s a breakthrough appeared with the three-tier approach. Clearly, the country is being affected in different ways. It is absolutely right that some parts of the country should be subject to different rules and regulations than others. So the three-tier approach is a good approach and should be -- definitely should be pursued with great care taken as to what the lockdown issues are and how they might be applied. In terms of hospitality, I’ve got three sons, two of which are heavily involved in pubs and restaurants and bars, so I follow that quite carefully. One thing you must remember, there’s a huge number of young people employed and one of the biggest concerns I have is we’re going to finish up with a lot of young people unemployed. So I really hope we can do something significant with hospitality and try to prevent who could be very significant unemployment in that area.
Douglas, hearing what Miriam and Ian have said, in terms of young people’s unemployment and the furlough falling off a cliff, do you think Boris Johnson should be doing more? It is not falling off a point. What we have is the furlough scheme --
It is significantly reduced in terms of the money people are going to get.
It has protected 9.6 million jobs across the United Kingdom, 40 billion of taxpayers money has been invested protecting the jobs. 13.85 billion going to the self employed with 5 million claims. This has been significant and one of the most generous schemes anywhere in the world.
You have the mayor of Greater Manchester in open revolt. This is not good for Boris Johnson. He has a fight on his hand.
The replacement is similar if you look at the level of support that individuals and employers have to put in in France, in Spain, in Germany is very similar to -- two-thirds the government are paying in the United Kingdom compared to other countries. But Ian is right, because young people are effectively the ones that could be affected by this. First of all their education. Many of them didn’t get to finish their school education, they didn’t get to sit exams, they went on to college and university, and in Scotland and other parts of the United Kingdom they had a terrible initial experience at university, and now they are going to be paying for this for much of their lives and the job market, when we get through this health pandemic, the global response to the economic emergency that we’re all going to face is one that we have to treat extremely seriously. So I think it is young people we have to be thinking about. That’s why the UK government have introduced schemes to help young people into employment. But, again, as the chancellor has said and the prime minister has said, it is going to be impossible to save every single job but we are putting in place tools to protect as many as possible, as we have done with the furlough scheme and the replacement scheme going forward.
Seema.
I was very surprised to hear that the job support scheme was talked about by Douglas there as being the same as the furlough scheme. Even Dame Lewis Casey has come out to say if you are going to say that you’re going to pay two-thirds of someone’s salary you should also be saying they can only afford two-thirds of their rent or pay for two-thirds of the food for their family. We have a system that is currently -- decisions being made by the prime minister and the chancellor that are pushing people into destitution. The most important thing we need to do right now is look at how we both deal with the health crisis that we’re facing as well as the economic crisis. I have had many employers tell me that the scheme is not going to incentivise them to keep on employees, especially as times get tough again. Many in the aviation industry as well, who are suffering from the slow down. That’s because when the government talked about this scheme as trying to keep people on part time, actually, it is more essential to keep two people on part time than it is to keep one person on full time. Rather than this, the government should be looking at what has been done in Germany and elsewhere and what the Labour Party has been saying to have a proper short hours scheme that supports people to stay in work and in their jobs part time. Because the cost of long-term unemployment is much greater than what we’re going to otherwise have to pay to keep people in their jobs, in viable jobs, that will be there when we come through this next period.
Grant.
If we are looking for money, why don’t we -- here’s a radical suggestion along the lines of Yanis Varoufakis, the billions of pounds given to management consultants, instead of giving it to them why don’t we give it to local leaders? Let’s give it to hospitality workers, let’s give it to all the entertainment workers who so desperately need it and have been failed.
Like many people, I’m really surprised that when Rishi Sunac made this announcement back in March to put his arms around everybody and support us that this would suddenly stop, which feels like it is about to happen. If we were at war, we’d have a war chest and it would be continuing. You wouldn’t give up after 7 months. I feel the government went into one gear and are totally shifting into another one now. It looks bleak for a lot of people in different sectors of different economies, different areas, different parts of the country.
About the job safety scheme Rishi Sunac said that universal credit is a safety net for those whose income has dropped, he proposed cuts to universal credit. This is going to cost 6 million households, with the bottom percent losing most of their income. This is terrible economics. He has taken 6 billion out of the economy by cutting benefits, that’s over 6 billion of cash being spent in a consumer-driven economy. As usual, the poor are paying the cost of it.
Kate, we’ve ranged far and wide in this debate. The original question asked by Martin, when is a café a restaurant, a restaurant a bar, there’s been a lot of talk about that in Scotland, does it differ in Cardiff, Edinburgh, London? Do you think there should be one rule across the United Kingdom?
No, for two reasons. But I think we want to take a four-nations approach as much as possible. Clarity of messaging is critically important. However, the simpler the message, the harsher it is. If you look at Scotland, for example, I represent the Highlands, which is a different rate of infection than some parts of the central belt. Now we’ve taken action to have stricter restrictions in some parts of the central belt than we do in the -- because it leads to greater compliance, people know what’s going on and there’s higher rates there. That will mean a slight variation in what the restrictions are.
That’s not fair.
It is a primary source of funding that is the principal area means by which we have to mitigate the effects. Now we worked together, but I think it is ludicrous that just as we are seeing the rate of infection increase, and the likelihood of restrictions, we’re seeing the end of what has been a life line. I accept, I have been open and honest, that it has been a life line for many businesses. Now is not the time to end it. Everybody can see it, every business the length and breadth of the country can see it but the chancellor can’t appear to see it.
In fairness, you and the Labour Party welcomed, when the Chancellor announced the replacement furlough, you both welcomed it at the time. You said it was right there was a replacement. But to say you were waiting for the chancellor to outline any further support you could give, the chancellor has said Scotland will get 700 million more.
Or on Friday.
Why today did Nicola Sturgeon say it would be 40 million going to the businesses.
You appreciate that’s for health. It is for health, not just business support.
It is for the 3,000 pound that the UK government is giving to businesses in England that you could give to businesses in Scotland. They have had to wait 10 days. Sorry if I can just finish because this is important to the businesses watching it. I spoke to them on Monday, I had a virtual summit with businesses. They are crying out for help and help now. Give them that 700 million you got from the chancellor [Unreportable cross-talk.]
Give them some of the 250 million you haven’t spent --
Hang on, if you both talk at the same time no one can hear.
The two points I would make is small grants of 500 pound is no replacement for the furlough scheme. Point number 2 is that 700 million pound, that does not just cover business support. That’s for health, transport, and a whole host of other things. The third point is the business support we put in place is more generous than the UK government support.
At the moment in the rest of the UK if you’re obliged by law to close you’ll get a grant. But all the businesses in the supply chain won’t get funding, the businesses impacted won’t get funding. In Scotland we provided funding for those required to close, but also in the supply chain. I think that’s the breadth of support that we need to see. But let’s not kid ourselves, 1,500 pounds of grant, as important as it is, is no replacement for the furlough scheme.
Another question from Colin Campbell.
A recent poll shows that Scottish independence has a huge majority of 58 percent support. How long can the UK government continue to deny the Scottish people the right to have their say on their future?
Douglas, you said before that London is, in part, responsible for the support for independence in Scotland. Do you want to expand on that?
Just to answer the question. I don’t downplay the challenge that we face. Those of us in Scotland like me who believe in the union, who believe in Scotland’s proud place, has part of four nations of the United Kingdom. But I also don’t believe there’s anything inevitable about this, despite what the SNP representatives might say on this panel because I think Scotland’s best and proudest days are when we stand together as part of a union we helped to build. But I look at this from a permanent point of view. I have a wee 18 month old son, and I look at him and when I see these polls I don’t get downhearted, I get more determined than ever before to ensure that when he grows up he can be as proud a Scott and as proud a Brit as me, but he can grow up in a United Kingdom rather than a divided Scotland. Those of us who believe in the union, who will fight for the union have to work harder and better than ever before to promote what Scotland gets from the union and what it gives to the union.
How much responsibility do you think the Westminster government has to play in the support for union here.
I’ve said in my speech to party embassy --
For independence, I said union.
I knew where you were going with. I said to party members we need to do far more. All of us do, all of us who believe in the union have to work far harder to promote that case of what Scotland gets from the union.
Have you spoken to the prime minister about it?
I have. I have spoken to the prime minister, to MPs, to previous MPs and politicians from respective governments. It is something, since when we had the referendum in Scotland that voted for the Scottish Parliament to be reestablished and since devolution in 1999 I think there has been a feeling in London by successive UK governments of devolving and forgetting. That disinterest only aids the nationalist cause. For me, there are so many things to be passionate about for the union, what we should be fighting for. That argument is as strong today as 6 years ago when we had the referendum in 2014.
Miriam.
I think the first point to make here is the campaign for independence hasn’t started yet. Westminster is making the campaign in and of itself. It is increasing appetite for independence by virtue of the actions it has taken. I’m not surprised to see a growing appetite for independence. We have had a multitude of factors. There’s not any one single factor that increased the support for independence. I think there has been a multiple attitude of things. It is important to bear in mind where we were prior to this. We faced a decade of austerity from a government we didn’t vote for. We saw things pushed through by another government we didn’t vote for backed by billionaire financiers. When Scotland voted to remain, it didn’t make an ounce of difference. Now we see the pushing through of the internal market Bill. To quote Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister that this is an enormous power grab, and we’re seeing a shoring up, a concentration of powers in Westminster from devolved -- that matters most now because what that does is set the standards going forward for goods and services. That’s important because we are heading into trade deals. I’d argue it is not going to be the UK government setting the standards; it is probably going to be the US and whoever our future trade deals are with and we are going to see a race to the bottom and I think it is eminently clear that areas like our NHS will be on the table. We have already seen concerns from farmers, from environmental campaigners and unions about what the prospect of that might be.
The UK government has always been at pains to save the NHS won’t be on the table.
The UK government also voted against an amount to the trade bill to protect the NHS against foreign interference and to protect wages.
It has been -- that the NHS is not up for sale in these trade deals.
I would like to hear from the audience. Kate.
Thanks, Fiona. I’m wondering, having been through the previous independence referendum then the chaotic fallout of -- whether you voted remain or leave, when people will start to recognise that referendums aren’t the right way to decide anything.
Susan.
I would like to know who is requesting all these opinion polls at the moment. The UK is currently facing an economic and a health crisis of epic proportions. Surely constitutional questions are of complete irrelevance. Can’t we focus on what matters at the moment as one United Kingdom?
I think we had a referendum five years ago. It is an incredibly important question. We should absolutely not be addressing it again. What’s gone completely wrong in the last two or three years is that we’ve got a Scottish government who generally are adversarial and negative about a whole range of things that might happen with the UK and Scotland working together. That’s what we should have. We don’t have a devolved government which is just looking after Scotland at all. We have a devolved government who are focused on independence. What we need is a devolved government who will work with the UK government. I have a list of six different things here which could happen, but right now are being held back because, frankly, the Scottish government’s position is they don’t want any big money help from the UK government because somehow it will cut across the the devolution right. So the structure and the system right now just isn’t working. If we could get that sorted out and, honestly, get both governments working together in a whole range of quite exciting things that could be done, we would be able to look ahead. We’re not. With great respect, the SNP have one objective in mind, that’s independence. Their actual job is to look after the Scottish people and get the best deal for the Scottish people. That’s not the priority right now.
I would disagree with that. I do have a very vested interest in ensuring that the UK delivers for Scotland. But on this I agree with Douglas in his maiden speech a few weeks ago where he stated that his Conservative bosses don’t care about Scotland. That is the bottom line and that is why we’re seeing an increase in the polls. The polls are indicative of public opinion, but we had the 9th conservative poll showing support for independence.
Do you think the falling out between Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond has been helpful?
More people are interested in suppressing the virus and making decisions about their long-term future because they can see -- the polls prove this point -- they can see that Scotland’s best interests are served by a Scottish government. The question for me is what is the democratic route to delivering that. That is a question I would pose to the Conservatives. It is unsustainable and it is undemocratic to keep saying no. We have to have a consistent increase in the polls. We have another poll yesterday saying that two-thirds of people in Scotland think that there should be another referendum in the next five years years.
What about the point that, with Brexit looming, what that may bring, being in the middle of a pandemic, this is something that should be put on the back burner for now.
That’s why right now from the Scottish government perspective of my day is spent in dealing with the virus and dealing with the economic fall-out of the virus. But there are going to be questions emerging. If you take one question like economic recovery, the last time we saw the UK government borrowing to these levels was probably 2008 in the aftermath of the financial crash. That was followed by a decade of austerity, where the poorest in society paid for the failures. As we come out of this crisis, I want to ensure that we are investing in people, we are investing in infrastructure and we deal with our public finances in a fundamentally different way. That will require financial powers, fiscal powers to be in the hands of Scottish government not the Conservatives in Westminster that most people in Scotland can vote for.
Can I just get the rest of the panel. We’re beginning to run out of time. Seema, the question is how long can the UK government continue denying the Scottish to have have a say. If Keir Starmer was prime minister would he give them that right?
We said we will be going into the next Scottish elections opposed to a referendum and independence. I think it comes back to the point that we’re in the middle of a pandemic. It is very surprising to me that Kate talked about investment and she talked about the polling data, but I’m surprised she didn’t mention, for example, that the child poverty figures out today show that child poverty in Scotland is at 24 percent and rising and rising as well in Nicola Sturgeon’s own constituency, in Glasgow. I think we’re missing the point about what we should be really focused on. People’s health, jobs, the economy, education. Children this year who have seen a disrupted education, it is not going to magically correct itself next year. Look, I just feel that the last thing people are going to want is another divisive referendum when there is such important issues to focus on just to rebuild a health system with our NHS currently under strain, with a lot more to come, our economy with jobs possible not back to pre-Covid levels for 2 or 3 years. With the education, retraining, with older people losing their jobs and catching up with younger people. I think these are the critical issues. That’s why the Scottish Labour Party has been focusing on these issues. That’s what they will want to be talking about. This is where so much of the polling also shows that people’s priorities are across the United Kingdom.
My father, 100 in two weeks time, was born in Glasgow, my mother in London, my wife’s family came from Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Manchester and the south of England. I was in a health service where people came from all over the world and the great science being done in the UK is international. I think my answer is obvious.
We have little time left. I want to get around a few if I can. Lucas.
We have little time left. I want to get around a few if I can. Lucas.
I’m coming from a place where growing up in England, coming to a Scottish university, I was very pro the union. All my Scottish friends that I’ve made here at uni are all pro-independence. And on the point made that it’s important that we look for health and healing and ambitions and prosperity, seemingly what most of my friends say is the opportunities for Scotland outside of the United Kingdom, potentially being back in the European Union or making their own way, as the UK and Britain have said we’re going to do outside the union ourselves. Those opportunities are so much greater than if we’re stuck here in the United Kingdom and being consistently held back by Westminster that continues to prioritise London over any other part of the UK.