 I welcome the easing of lockdown so people can move on with their lives. Lives is all about risks and we've been under the complete control of the State since March 21st, is it not time to allow people who are aware of the risks now to make decisions about how they want to approach this situation. Given we live in a free, liberal society?
 Theo.
 I think they were trying to keep us safe. I don't think any one of us wants to be kept locked up but the reality is if we hadn't had the lockdown, many of us.wouldn't be here today, especially oldies like me. I think we have had to endure that, and we have to come out of this sooner rather than later, I totally agree because otherwise we are going to have a lot of unintended consequences, that's things that will be a lot worse than possibly, you know, some minor out breaks of the actual virus. So. It's important we come out now. It's important that we adopt the new normal, because, it is a new normal.
 We will never be back to normal until we get one or two things: A vaccine or a successful treatment. When we have got those two things, we can get back to normal. Until then, we will be under control one way or another, and we better stick to it. Otherwise we will be on total be lockdown.
 We stay stick to it. Jess Phillips, the rules are pretty complex now and they are different in different parts of the UK. Is it not time to allow people to make decisions about how they want to approach the situation?
 Look, I mean that's ultimately what we want for everybody, we want everybody to feel free and be able to go around and do how they would have done prior to lockdown. But, I mean, where I live, lots and lots of people have died and all over the country that is the case, but in areas like the one I represent, which has large proportions of poorer communities and BMA communities, we have seen terrible rates of deaths and so, as Theo said, these controls were to try and keep us safe.
 But it is very confusing for people, and so I think that fundamentally now, people are going to start just doing what they think is right, because it seems there is a changing landscape with the communication that we're hearing. I have had people this week, pregnant women saying to me, well I'm in my third trimester can I go out? Older people who were shielding saying, what are the rules for me? And I think it needs much clearer communication. And also, an understanding that this isn't to control. This wasn't to try and -- the Government, I could criticise them on a lot of things, I don't think they are out there to control our minds or our liberty. The reality is, we need to be able to trust the Government in what they say and listen when they speak and believe that it's based on our welfare. And at the moment I feel that the communication is a bit confusing.
 Steve, making decisions about how they want to approach a situation, is that what we have seen in Bournemouth today where a major incident was declared because so many people descended onto the beach?
 Obviously what we have seen is very disappointing today. As Theo said, the lockdown only works with the consent of the people, we have to trust the vast majority of people complied with the lockdown because they saw the advice from the chief medical centre, the advice from the chief scientific officer, they saw what was happening in our countries and recognised we needed to protect the NHS and take the lockdown as Theo says to save lives. That is the measures that we're taking. But it is a balance in terms of the questioner says is concerned as to the lockdown being too much, others like Jess feel it was insufficient. So we have got to trust the common sense of the British public.
 We can't legislate for every single scenario. The vast majority of the British public -- there will always be exceptions but the vast majority of the British public have exercised common sense, have worked to protect the NHS, have made huge sacrifices but it's right now that we restart the economy, because there is consequences to that as well. [DONE]
 Do you think it was inevitable in some way that we would see a scene like we did at Bournemouth today when you have the Prime Minister, just two days when he was asked by a Brighton MP about how seaside towns should respond, he said I'll be calling on local representatives to show some guts to allow people to return to and support. Do you think that's helpful, given what we have seen today.
 What we have said is, people need to exercise common sense, observe 2 metres where they can, but there are circumstances and I'm sure we'll come on to them from a business prospective, where there are pressures, impacting people on their jobs, losing jobs and livelihoods. And that has health consequences, based on a macro level, but also in terms of pressures such as our mental health. So there is balance to be struck. On the whole, the British public have responded extremely well in observing the lockdown but it's right now that we restart the economy.
 So as someone from the shielding category, I have got kidney failure so I have been pretty much in isolation for three months. The idea of releasing just completing sort of releasing lockdown terrifies me, to be honest.
 In Brighton today already the beaches were incredibly crowded and I feel that like if we reduce lockdown any more things like that are going to happen. We had tonnes of people coming down to Brighton and I can't do anything. I don't look ill, so when I'm out and about and I have started, just starting to go out into the society, people don't know I'm ill so people can -- my health is relying on other people's actions and that's quite scary, because I feel very out of control of my own situation.
 Kofie.
 I am a BAME man. I also live with a vulnerable person, who happens, like myself, to be became and we have seen a lot covered on the news about how the became community in particular are very vulnerable. And when we look at the countries who have looked at lockdown, we have seen that there have been some spikes in the virus. Now, obviously the Government, they are dealing with two priorities. So one is to protect lives and the other is to protect the economy. So, I am just wondering if we're doing both like what sort of plan is the Government going to come up with to make sure that two and two don't sort of come together here and that we are also ensuring that those who are particularly vulnerable and those of the BAME community in particular will be protected while lifting these restrictions.
 Suresh you asked the question.
 Thank you for letting me respond, I completely agree with what Theo said. I do think that the lockdown being implemented when it was implemented was the correct time. But I think now the indirect effect of the lockdown, nobody can quantify, you can't quantify the massive impact to people's mental health. They have been away from education for six months. People are missing cancer appointments. Cancer is a potent disease. So who -- I think the lockdown should be eased as quickly as possible in a safe way and people are now aware of the risks, so they can choose to accept those, and I think the economy does need to get moving as well as other issues too. So I do welcome the lockdown being eased slowly.
 So, George, the question was, is it time to allow people to make their own decisions about how they approach this pandemic?
 Thanks for the question. I think people making their own decisions is contingent on them having reliable information, and unfortunately I don't get that from this Government. I don't feel like we're having consistent clear messaging. When the lockdown was initially imposed, it was very unclear, the details of that lockdown. As these measures have been eased, we have been told to factor in the R number, or the -- we make arbitrary decisions about what's appropriate behaviour where most of us can't really figure out what even the threshold for achieving what the Government was once describing as herd immunity would be. So, I take Steve's point about the British public not being stupid, but we really need clear and consistent messaging.
 Iona.
 Well, I think that Suresh has quite rightly brought up the concerns about the economy, but also about people's mental and physical health during this time and obviously lockdown across the whole country is not sustainable, and therefore we have to find a way, as Theo has said, of living with the virus and having some distance from the virus and making sure we can do that safely until we find a vaccine or an effective treatment. And I also completely understand Kirsty and Kofie's concerns about coming back out into the society if they don't feel that it is absolutely 100% safe yet to be back out there and these are the two competing concerns that we're having to consider right now, and there are no easy choices to make. But when we look at what happened in Bournemouth today, I think we need to appeal to people's sense of responsibility, and I think most people have complied remarkably well with the lockdown, especially young people.
 I think this next generation coming through have really defined this snowflake stereotype that's been applied to them too many times, and have actually shown themselves to be very compassionate, responsible and stoic and I'm sure we can appeal to their sense of responsibility and say, look, try and have some good judgement about situations like going to the beach, if you think it's too crowded, try and stay away because it would be so devastating for us to have to go back into a second lockdown both financially and for our health.
 Lots of you have got your hands up in our virtual audience, Hanna.
 I think what Suresh said about people accepting the risk is not the full story, you accept the risk for yourself by breaking lockdown, by wishing that lockdown was over sooner. But you don't accept the risk for people like key workers who don't have a choice, they have to leave the house. For example, my dad was 55. He was a key worker and he passed away from Coronavirus.
 Hanna, I am sorry to hear that. Hanna: When you say that people can make their own choice and accept the risk, you also accept the risk for the people that you will infect.
 Of course, that's the different thing about this pandemic, isn't it? It's not necessarily just the risk you take on yourself, it's how you affect other people as well.
 Emma.
 I echo what Hanna just said, in that, you know,my family are all pretty much NHS workers, so although you might be taking a risk yourself, if you get ill you end up in hospital as putting people like that at risk as well. And George also mentioned about, you know, having clear messaging and, you know, people using that to make decisions. Well, the daily briefings are so, I mean I am in Scotland, we're lucky where we have, we still have some visibility of what's going on, but we still have some visibility of what's going on, but in England, as far as I am aware, it's almost like it's back to business as usual.
 Daniel.
 I wanted to make a comment about the lockdown. So I live with -- both my parents are in that vulnerable high risk category so I have been in lockdown for over four months now, because instead of following what the Government advice was I decided that it was probably safer for us to lockdown earlier, because if you look at when we locked down compared with every other country in Europe, including Germany, we came out later. So I just want to ask the Government if they think that the advice has either been clear or sensible? Because, the number of people I know that have died from the virus, it's over ten now. So... I don't feel like I have been able to put my full faith in the Government in looking after my parents.
 Gosh, ten people, Daniel, you know ten people who have died.
 I have got one friend, his uncle and father died within a month period.
 I am so so sorry to hear that. I mean, Steve, this is -- it's interesting, isn't it, because we have a panel here of people under 30. And you are not all necessarily saying the same thing but it's interesting how many of you are saying caution, you know, let's not rush into this, people are vulnerable, you yourselves perhaps are vulnerable because you have underlying illnesses or you live with people who have them. And you have had George and a number of people there talking about they don't feel they are getting clear messaging.
 You hear from the personal loss and tragedy of that why the lockdown was necessary, to get the infection down, which it's done, to equity were the to ensure that we met the five tests we set.
 What about what they are saying the messaging not being clear?
 Just to answer George when he said the lockdown wasn't clear. Quite the opposite if you look at the stay at home message for example, they sage add advice was up to 20% continuing to go to school. It actually the lockdown was highly effective. The question is how do you then balance -- one of the comment was we're now lifting it in its entirety. We're not. It's in a staged way. So there is still theatres, gyms, areas where people are saying we're not lifting the lockdown quickly enough because they want to get to work, they are worried about their livelihood. So it's a balance. But the messaging was very clear
 Do you think it's clear now?
 That's enabled us to get the infection rate down in the way that we have.
 Just on that point. Let me just clarify what I was trying to say. It's not that the idea of lockdown wasn't clear when it was established. It's that, first of all, the leader of your Government missed five Cobra meetings -- advice from top scientists was ignored for a while, as the point was made from the panel, we were the last of the rich countries definitely to enact a lockdown in our geographic neighbourhood, and there has been reports from very credible people in the medical community that, say, if action was taken even two weeks later, there would be a significant dent in the number of dead from Covid-related deaths.
 Even as late as April, I think the Government was denying that there was a significant risk to care facilities and by mid-May 40% of Covid-related deaths had come from care homes. So, I think it would go a long way if your Government began to show a little bit of contrition and acknowledgment of the mistakes that have been made in the handling of this crisis up to this point, as opposed to the nit-picking and the point-arguing that we have seen on Twitter, very strangely, from this Government in particular.
 I mean, I agree with lots of that, and part of the problem with the communication that I certainly have found as a constituency PM, let alone a citizen with children out of school, is that the Government would stand in front us and say things like we have put a protective ring around care homes, and I felt at times like I was going mad, because I was talking to my care homes and hearing the reality on the ground.
 And, you know, I think that the idea that we need complete honesty and complete trust, and it's hard to trust politicians at the best of times, I get that, but at the moment, we need real trust and honesty in our politics, because that is the only way that any consent of either the lifting of lockdown, or if we have to go back into it or as we have seen when we had to go into it, it's going to work, and it has just felt a bit confused, it has felt sometimes like there was one rule for one and one rule for another in the very very famous case now, and it's not -- we are just asking for honesty, I think, as citizens, and certainly as the opposition, I want the Government to do well. But I do have to feel that I can trust that they are telling the truth.
 Let's take another question now from Imran Anwoir.
 Hi. With youth unemployment on the rise and the worries over further negative impacts on our economy and recovery and as a recent graduate as of December 2019, what assurances do I have as a young person entering the professional world of work that there will be enough opportunity available for me?
 What's your situation, Imran?
 So, I had a job offer in the industry, which I was -- which is what I graduated in, but it was revoked because of lockdown. And, you know, they said that because of their financials for the rest of the year and the worry around Coronavirus, they weren't really sure if they could keep my new employment. So, I'm just a little bit concerned about if there is enough, you know -- young people already don't have enough opportunity as it is in the professional space, so, I'm just worried about what plan the Government has to sort of bring that opportunity up first.
 You had a job, which is now gone. Are you working at all at the moment?
 Yeah, so I am currently working in food supply, it was my part time supply at university and luckily I didn't hand in my notice so I can still work there.
 What? A supermarket or something like that?
 Yeah, yeah.
 Just out of interest, hands up of our audience, how many of you are either out of work or have been furloughed? Right. Okay. What's going to happen to young people, Steve? Boris Johnson talked about they should all have apprenticeships. A lot of people seem to be taken by surprise. Is that going to happen?
 The key challenge before us is jobs. If you look at what happened going into the pandemic, we had halved the rate of unemployment amongst the young. But the young tend to be the first to feel the impacts of a recession, which is why, if you look at the figures now for the 18 to 24s, they are 10% of the working age population with 18% of welfare claimants. So they tend to feel hardest first, and are often in the sectors like hospitality, tourism, where the impacts are greater. So the strategy has been first to protect as many jobs as possible. That's why we have had the furlough scheme, which has protected over 9 million jobs. So a significant cost of over 22 billion pounds. The self-employment scheme which has protected again around 2 and a half million jobs, at a cost of 7 and a half billion, while we supported 850,000 businesses through the grants scheme, investing 10 billion pound into that. So there's been very significant measures alongside all the things we have done on cash flow to support businesses.
 Moving forward, you are right, you go from the protect phase onto the next phase which is how do we we restart the economy? What are the jobs we can move to from those areas of the economy where jobs are being lost, so greening the economy, looking at the challenges, the safer by 2050.
 Just very specifically, what about, Boris Johnson has said apprenticeships for young people. When might that be?
 So the Chancellor will give a statement in July which will be all about the next phase, talking about how we green the economy, how we respond with the infrastructure projects, because jobs, and jobs particularly for young people, is one of the key challenges before us, and that's very much what we are focussed on within the Treasury at the moment.
 If I could jump in here because I think Stephen is absolutely correct to say that young people's jobs right now need to be right at the top of the priority list. 
 The apprenticeships have gone more to those from privileged background and we see within the rules that actually the apprenticeship levy can be used to send managers on courses to get MBAs. I don't think that's what the apprenci levy was meant for. It's meant to help young it's not necessarily even about spending more money, although there could be a case for more target funding. Ity about spending the money Westminster and making labour market.
 Katie.
 Hi. I work in hospitality, furloughed and have been since the middle of March. I am lucky, as in I'm 26 so I have done hospitality for quite some number of years, so I have already got experience behind me so if somebody was more likely to keep me on rather than somebody who is kind of 17, 18 and it's their part-time job while they are studying. I kind of -- I don't necessarily disagree with Imran, I can see the point he is making, but I also think that, for a while, university degrees have been advertised as the way to go, and studying -- like, I studied music at university, I know people that have studied maths and things like that.
 I think younger people don't necessarily have the opportunity to go into something like a trade, which is probably more valuable. I do think there is a community of people who want to be influencers and YouTubers and things like that. I'm not saying that's everyone. Obviously everyone is different, but I do feel like that is where people would probably find more work if they were interested in more like a trade rather than being an influencer.
 Hi. I think I dread to think what it's going to be like. I graduated last September and I have been in between waiting to start my masters and saving money for that, and it was already next to impossible for me to find a job this year. So, with the pandemic and with Brexit, I dread to think what it's going to be like for those graduating this year. For me, the jobs that I did find were minimum wage, they didn't cover your living expenses, you had to top that up with benefits. There is unpaid internships, nothing is paid. They are given disproportionately to 018 / 33 privileged people.
 Steve reeled off all these stats about young people and where they work, in hospitality, so that really worries me because you know, these things but there wasn't a pandemic before, so young people are suddenly on your radar?
 I was just worning, this is kind of aimed at Steve, because I feel like particularly it's been raised by the pandemic, there is more opportunities for people to work on-line, and with everything going on at the moment, I feel like self employment should actually be encouraged and I don't feel like the conservative Government are actually encouraging people andity particularly /KRUPBG err of -- I get off my own back and do a lot of things and I feel like we should be encouraging self-employment and small businesses more.
 I'll come back to you. Theo, if we are going to talk about self-employment. Obviously you were an entrepreneur from the get go. But you know from Niamh there, I mean there is a whole swathe of prospects going to be? We are facing possibly the worst recession since the second world war, if not further back than that. It looks pretty bleak.
 I couldn't put it better myself. It's going to be tough. Unemployment is going to rise. The job market is going to be incredibly difficult. Youngsters are going to phase a tsunami of job losses, and this is one of the few times I'm going to say this, because I have always believed in a very free economy and non-discrimination, but we need to start looking at some positive discrimination where we can actually address the issues of people of a certain age with support to employers to make sure we encourage that. I think we need to really understand that
 You mean encourage young people in and older people out?
 No, no, not at all. Bad news. My first job, I left school at 16. Very little qualifications, dyslexic, sent a hundred applications out and got, like, a hundred rejections. Mind you, my applications wouldn't have been good reading with my spelling. But actually the only reason I got a job, my first job, was because at the time the Government were giving allowances to businesses. I think it was about 15 hundred quid a year, it was a lot of money, to take on somebody of a certain age who hadn't had a job before. And that -- so they took me on when they were not sure they should be spending 1,500 quid, but the fact was, it was subsidised and that gave me my first job and opportunity and then I could move on from there. We need initiatives like that that are going to -- because the measures that the Chancellor has put in, but it was required. It had to be done very quickly, and I am afraid some people went through the net.
 Now, we need to focus a lot more and deal with category by category, industry by industry, age by age, requirement by requirement, it's hard work and you can't just make -- no disrespect to our politicians, Steve -- but the fact is, you know, the present Government do like to make big announcements for PR purposes. And we just need to do the graft and the work first and actually accept that sometimes it's going to be difficult, and sometimes you are going to say things that are not popular but you just want to be respected, not liked all the time, we must stop this wanting to be liked by the public. Let's get honest with them, tell them how it's going to be, and actually then address difficult issues that are going to be difficult, but if you show you're working at it, people will work with you on it.
 I express support for much of what Theo just said and much of what the panel has said. I do think self-employment, entrepreneurship, is going to be necessary moving forward as so much of our industry transforms. We're dealing with a new society. We go through it every time. We see someone, we think we're going to shake hands or embrace, we don't do these things any more, there is so much that we don't do any more. Look at the shape of this show. Now is the time for us to get creative about how we, as the incoming generation into the workforce, are going to reshape the economy
 I'm going to come -- but, Jess.
 I think -- I mean, I agree almost entirely with what Theo said, in that the Government needs to act now to stimulate the jobs for younger people going forward. They are going to be a lost generation, and, let's face it, the young people today, people who are under 30 today have pretty much lived their entire economic lives since the 2008 downturn and they have had to tighten their belts and have lost out on things that were there certainly when I was younger. And the reality is that the Government needs to announce, already have announced what it's going to do to help businesses, get young people into training, into schemes, like Theo says, there can be different sectors, there can be different standards and it needs to be responsive to what is actually happening out there, because, without it, we're just going to end up with a generation lost. And even in the announcements last week with regard to the tutoring that school children will now get, very welcome announcement, but an hour before the announcement was made, those aged 16 to 18 were taken out of it, and these are the people who are -- we are going to need to help, who have already lost all their youth services, had their schools cut for the entire time that they might have been there.
 Now is the time to step up. Like, Germany has already announced stimulus packages, and say: What are we going to do to create jobs and training and encourage businesses to take these people on? Because these are our children.
 Suresh.
 Sorry, if I could just say, yes, I would say that Jess is absolutely right to say that colleges that help 16 to 19 year olds should be included in the Covid catchup fund. And that actually, spending that little bit more time in education could make all the difference. So, if we had targeted funding for booster courses, that just allowed young people to build up their skills, both hard and soft, before they go into the labour market, that could make all the difference between them being employable and attractive worker and being on the job scrap-heap. But I also think that this issue is too important to descend into party politics, and we have been hearing a long time about need for a commission on social care because, understandably, that's going to be extremely important to address after this crisis, but I wonder whether we also need a commission on young people's opportunities and jobs, for the parties to work together and to agree that this should be a priority and debate the details by all means, but for us to try and transcend that party politics and come together.
 So, Steve, lots of ideas being thrown in your direction. Targeted jobs for young people, Iona talking about a commission, more emphasis on entrepreneurship.
 What I can reassure Theo, there is no shortage of graft in the Treasury. If you look at the schemes that are put in place at speed like the furlough, the grants and so forth, have covered a lot to protect jobs, but I absolutely agree, then the next phase to that is how then for those jobs we're not able to protect, and the Chancellor has been very candid; we can't protect every job. There will be changes and, as the questioner picked up, there are changes in the way people are working, the use of on-line. If you look at GPs, only 3% were using on-line, GP surgeries before the pandemic. Now, it's up to 9%, so pretty much all. So there are changes to how people are operating on-line. That will change the work place and we're in very active discussions with employers, particularly small and medium employers, to see what schemes we can put in place to support them. But the first priority was protect as many jobs as possible. Over 9 million have been through the furlough scheme, but we then need to look at the next phase, which is how, particularly on things like apprenticeships, we get the right skills working with the National Citizens Service as well, get the right careers advice, skills, the right training for people moving forward.
 I really want to commend the Treasury for stepping in and providing so much support under the furlough arrangements. You mentioned that the idea of a commission for young people being kind of, talk about it more. But I think there is something more to be said about focusing on the opportunities and the challenges that will be faced by this generation and getting some significant indication of Government commitment to this issue. There are a number of issues, especially when we talk about housing, is a common concern across this generation in which the Government has made a lot of the right noises and talked about commitments that it's going to make, not necessarily this Government, but this generation of Conservative Government. And we retroactively find out that what's been happening behind the scenes, when there are no eyes on the process, is -- flies in the face of the sound that you have been making, specifically what prompted me to say that was the recent revelations about the Robert Genrik situation, the Housing Minister that's come under fire for signing off on a development, a billion-pound development that looks to undermine the provision of social housing in the community that this thing is planned in. So, I guess, as a generation, we sometimes question the sincerity with which you engage the challenges of our age group and vulnerable communities.
 Well, I know you want to come back on this. We actually have a question that addresses this point from Luke McCroy Jones.
 So given the Covid-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected groups including the young, how should a Government /SHRU there is more support for luxury developments?
 I assume you are referring to the Housing and Local Community Secretary, Robert Genrik, who has also been on the front page of the papers for a few days now, about this development in Tower Hamlets in London, which is now being reviewed, financed by Richard Desmond and his company? The question is about should the Government be doing more to support social and affordable housing. Jess?
 Well, yes. Every government that has existed since probably, I'd say probably the 1970s should have done more to build social housing and to ensure that any stock that was lost for the sale of social housing was replaced at at least an equal value.
 The Government only in 2018 allowed councils to borrow money to build social housing, which they had stopped in 2012, so, for that entire period, they had stopped councils being able to borrow money in order to build council housing, and it was only lifted a couple of years ago, and I have absolutely no idea why, other than it seems that what that does is give the whip hand to rich developers to be the only people in the market for house-building, and we can see from the Robert Genrik affair how powerful they actually are, sending chummy text messages talking about not giving money or dough, I believe was the term that was used, to the Marxists in Tower Hamlets, which of course means the children and the adults who would have used the hospitals and schools that that money would have gone to. So, yes, they absolutely need to be doing more. We all need to be doing more. I am sure that the minister on the panel will say we have done much more than the Labour Party ever did. It's a stock standard line. And, yes, do you know what? The Labour Party should have built more houses and so should this Government build considerably more houses that people can actually afford to live in.
 Theo? 
 There is no question in my mind, as part of the reinvestment to get the economy going and get us out of this mess that we're undoubtedly going to get into, is a massive investment in social housing and we must start a massive programme of building and get -- and boost the economy. There is a massive shortage, so it's not rocket science. There is a massive shortage. We need to get people back at work. We need to invest where people need it. So social housing is the obvious place for us to go straight into, like, now, not requiring any more reports, just get on with it. 
 I completely agree that we need more social housing. People who live in social housing in cramped conditions, because there are no social housing for them, and other under prejudiced people died disproportionately from Covid-19 compared to their more privileged peers.
 This seems like a typical Conservative: The rich get richer and the poor get poorer. This shouldn't be something that is secondly thought about. These are people who require houses. This is one of the number-one priorities, and unfortunately with Covid, it's just gotten worse. So, stop promising us X, Y and Z and actually deliver housing.
 I welcome the demand being put on the Government in terms of investment in the youth and social housing and things such as that but I come to the point that I made at the beginning, and I agree with Theo, to do and fulfil those demands what we need to be doing is making sure the economy is restarted in a proportionate and a sensible way. I think there's been a lot of unfair criticism to the Government on -- by some of the panelists here and some of the other viewers. I think they should be applauded for the furlough scheme they have done. This is an unprecedented situation. The only way they can invest more is if they can get the economy going.
 Iona?
 Well, the housing crisis in the UK is extraordinarily complicated. As Jess said, it's one that we have had for decades, successive governments really failed to tackle comprehensively. When you look at the specific case of Robert Genrik, I don't want to comment on the details of the case, but what I do want to say is that, in this country, the new-build housing industry needs to be held to account for building homes that are overpriced to shoddy standards and, in the last week, we have seen a young couple in less centre banner from the front of their house saying buying this decision we ever made. Come and ask us why. And obviously their developer wasn't particularly happy about that, tried to have it stopped. But that was their experience and unfortunately it's all too common. have is radical reform. To be fair we hear a lot of are going to kick the planning laws into touch, which is exactly what we need. We need to have reform of land values. So, when developers buy up land, they owning that land. None of it is shared with the what we need is to share those profits with the community so that they can be invested pack into the social and affordable housing and local infrastructure. To be fair, the community infrastructure levy was supposed to do that. However, all too often it tends to be negotiated away by powerful developers and councils cave in because they just want to get more houses built in the local area come what may. So that's not been working and I think that's been around longer than the current conservative generation of politicians.
 I mean, George, obviously you have talked about the Robert Genrik situation already, but in terms of social housing overall?
 For a while, as has been alluded to, the stock of social housing has been slipping into the private sector. A lot of times it's in negotiations that the community have not been privy to. Yes, in 2018, the Government did mandate that, for developments above a certain number, communities need to be consulted. That is a welcome change. But there is something more pernicious that has been happening in the reduction of the social housing stock for a while.
 Quite of few of you have hands up. Katie?
 Hi. I happen to live in an area of Worcestshire that has quite a lot of green belt. Whilst we do need a lot more houses, we need to be environmental about it. There is a lot of houses that are run down and there is buildings that we could knock down and rebuild where they are and make them, obviously, I think, as Iona was saying, better than the new-builds that are currently being built. Why on earth are contracts trying to be taken out on green belts which should be protected environmentaly when there are brown belt places and places that should be knocked down and built with better houses, surely would make better use of the space that's there.
 Imran: I also wanted to mention I think that especially in London, rent is far too high for what people are earning, and I think the Government needs to do more in people. Because as a young people, saving for a deposit when I am paying rent in London that's extortionately high and trying to save for a deposit. I think rent regulation is sincerely another point that the Government need to look into.
 I think another important consideration here of course is that the same city that the development, the billion pound development was approved in was the same city that three years ago had the Grenfell Tower tragedy and still there are blocks in dangerous, so when is the Government actually going to act and protect people in this tower block housing?
 Can I just add to that point? I don't know if it's already been covered, but the CIL, that levy --
 That's the infrastructure levy, which is paid for by developers and it goes towards the Council for them to use for local services.
 That's right. In this Robert Jenrick case, it is said that the decision to green light that one being in development was fast tracked so as to help the developer to avoid I think a 40 million plus payment into the community, that levy would have mandated. I'd also like to make a clarification. I don't think it was the Government in 2018 decided community should be consulted. I think it was actually the Mayor.
 Steve?
 Well, we need to build build build. I think immediately that means getting construction sites up and running. We have been supporting the construction industry through the managers we have taken. Planning is still an impediment to the pace at which we want to move. So we are planning to look at that in legislation and see what we can do to speed that up.
 We are doing significantly more already and we have made very big investments into that in the budget as well. But I think it's also, looking about how we build better. Because one of the things I am very pass net about is modern moths of construction, looking about how we build, where we assemble on site change the energy usage is much lower. So we can build has committed significant funds to this. In response to Granfel Tower, in particular, we committed in the /PWUPLGT additional funding to that as well. Some of those schemes have been slowed down because of Covid and the difficulty of actually doing work on that. I was talking about one of Jess's colleagues labour MP about that just yesterday. But we have committed funding to that. We are committed to build and one of the key things we can do now is get construction up and running so that industry can bounce back as quickly as possible.
 You have got quite a job on your hands, you have got over a million households who are on the social housing waiting list and in '2018/19 in England for example, 38 thousand new social housing units were built. That's a heck of a discrepancy.
 That's why we have strengthened the safety net. One of the measures that we took at the budget was to change the rent that's covered to 30% to support people in terms of the cost of rent. We have taken measures specifically about the challenges of people paying. Ultimately this is about the supply and the demand issue. The key thing we need to do is build more homes. We're committed to funding that but we also need to make the planning system more friendly to delivering on that, and we also need to look at the skills. It comes back to the earlier point. You know, skills for young people who we need to find employment for, the construction industry is a key part of that, the infrastructure we're committing, and that's how we bounce back from the pandemic that we have faced.
 What changes we have made in society in response to Coronavirus should be kept once restrictions are lifted?
 What changes should we keep? Right. Who wants to kick us off -- Jess, you are sort of smiling and nodding. Have you got one in mind?
 I mean, there is some things I have quite enjoyed about it. I liked being at home a bit more. So maybe we could move Worcestshire to Birmingham post-Corona, that would be good.
 Good luck with that --
 I think there's been a couple of things actually that we should keep and I think that there will be an element of creativity that comes out of this in tech sectors and how we have flexibility in our lives a bit more. So I have, for many many years, been campaigning for flexibility day one, largely for working mothers, although it would account for all working parents. And we have always been told no, you couldn't work at home, you wouldn't be getting enough done. And we have learnt that that is different now. We have learnt that we can be at productive when we are at home, if not more productive. But I also think from the prospective of somebody who cares very deeply about domestic violence and vulnerable people in their home, that for the first time people have woken up to the idea of what it would be like to be controlled and to be a prisoner in your own home. And I have seen a massive outpouring of support and care about that particular issue as well as a real love and support for some of our key workers, people that we can't actually live without. It didn't turn out to be the people who maybe were getting paid the most. It turned out to be low-paid key workers, often migrant workers. And I think that there is a kindness in the community that's been born.
 Okay. Hands up amongst our audience. Kofie.
 Just in relation to that question about what changes should be kept. I particularly am interested to know with the whole new regime of wearing masks going on public transport, going forward in the long term would that be maintained? And also, will shops and stores, any of them, public gatherings, adopt a policy where we have to wear a mask if we want to be in the shop and will there always be, particularly in gyms, like a restricted number of people who can enter the gym at a time?
 Is that something you want to see then permanent, you know, a permanence to face coverings, that sort of thing?
 Yeah, in particular spaces, probably like maybe shops and gyms and even public transport. Because when you are coming in contact with so many people like that, then we are still -- this virus, there is still a lot we don't know about it and the rates of transmission. I think it's important that we still have that protection and maintain the policy, as we said like this is a new normal.
 Okay. Ben?
 I agree with what Jess was saying about job flexibility. I think in the future we're going to see a lot more people working from home. Especially speaking personally as a chemist, I work in a lab everyday of the week but my company has introduced a policy of working in the lab now on alternate weeks and then working from home on other weeks. And that's been working really well and I think we're going to be seeing that going forward. I think another thing hopefully to see in the future as well is just better hygiene even across the board. I think this pandemic has increased everybody's awareness of hygiene even and good hygiene even practices so I think that would be a thing in the future with hand sanitise errand wearing face mask.
 What changes would you like to see? I have got to tell you we will never be the same again. Technology has been changing our lives over years and years and years now. But over the last three months, I think technology has been accelerated by at least five years in the way we have adopted it and we're using it. For me, I can't see myself having offices with that many people in ever again. I mean, the first thing we're going to be doing, after speaking to our colleagues, is cutting down the number of days of people coming to the offices, which means we will need less space, people will be able to balance their lives a lot better, and technology has done that. Retail will be very different as well. People have adopted on-line a lot faster than they would have done. So we are going to see a lot more pressure on our high street stores, and that's again something the Government have got to do something about, and then the rates, deferral holiday was brilliant. Get rid of it! Don't bring it back. It don't make sense. It's a tax from the 1500s. Life moved on. The Inernet did not exist in the 1500s. So get rid it have. It needs work for you to work out for something else to bring the taxation back into the Treasury which you need to give us our services but you'll have to do the work. Get rid of it. It's not practical. It's destroying the fabric of our society. So lots of things will have to change.
 Well, I do agree that working from home is more civilised and enlightened where possible. But I think we should also bear in mind that actually, young people do need hands-on training, mentoring in the workplace and you can't bring on all your interpersonal skills through zoom. I am mentoring a young person in the financial industry at the moment and she is shy and she says it's really difficult for her to become more confident just by talking to her colleagues on-line. So I think that working from home has been a luxury that older people have been able to enjoy because they have had a lot of access to outdoor space perhaps, and they have had better facilities. But younger people have been cooped up typically in rented accommodation with flatmates they don't know that well. I think that's a change we have to maybe balance. But also in the future we are going to have to reassess how we spend our money. Perhaps prior to this we had a very buoyant consumer economy, and obviously we want that to come back, but at the same time, individuals are looking at what they spent their money on and they are asking, does this align with my values? Did I actually need to be buying that many clothes when I know what damage it does to the environment, for instance? There are certain things that I certainly do want to come back, because I don't want to keep seeing all my arts and culture on YouTube and zoom. We have to rescue the arts industry in the UK and we won't know what we have got till it's gone.
 I would keep the -- I would say upswing in general care and etiquette that we have now understanding that we're in a pandemic. Understanding that people have been endangered. I felt that person to person has been a bit more sensitivity and attentiveness in how we check on each other and protect each other, especially from some of the on-line behaviours that might affect our emotional and mental well-being.
 I think we have a lot of good ones. For me, one Government it's the speed which we act across departments. If I look at the programme of getting food parcels to our most vulnerable as part of brought an am in of departments together. Or the way we have been able to support the homeless through this crisis, get people off the streets. We saw the Government acting in a very different way to perhaps the traditional model done by departments and I think there is a lot that comes from a pandemic where people come together with a common cause, act much more quickly. As Theo says in terms of being more data driven around where the technology is being used for the benefit of people. I think there is ways that Government can operate coming out of the pandemic where we can move much more quickly and be more data-driven. Taking your Government hat off for a minute, on a personal level, what would you keep?
 As someone with two children under ten, I think actually seeing more of the family at home working, I think all of us in apartment spend a lot of time away from home. So I think actually that aspect is something that I have really enjoyed and I think of us, the flexibility around that would be great to
 On an entirely frivolous note I have to say the one thing I can look forward to is not having to queue at the bar in the pub or -- because if you can sit at the table and summon someone to bring you a drink I think it will be marvellous. We have got a couple of hands. Just very quickly, Niamh.
 I think one thing that would be really poor to come out during this time, women in abusive homes and members of the LGBTQ community and unsafe housing and mental health issues and one thing to really keep I think is the appreciation of key workers and essential workers. Health workers in particular. And I hope that's something that people won't forget about and I hope we won't get back to the point where we're clapping when we're giving nursing -- when we're denying nurses pay rises. Instead, we're clapping in appreciation.
 I absolutely agree with George. I think we could keep kind of kindness and appreciation for our frontline team, as I have said before. But also, why don't we, as a nation, be a little bit less materialistic? I don't think a lot of people have wanted to go on fancy holidays or drive fancy cars. You have probably just wanted to cuddle a loved one. So I think we need to keep those values in our society.
