With the fuel crisis,
Lisa.
The Prime Minister came
years, we've been running down under the Tories our renewable capacity. We slashed solar tariffs. They blocked onshore winds and they got rid of gas storage which left us reliant on the markets. He said he would fix social care, but we got a tax hike on working people to pay not for social care, but the hole they have left in the National Health Service budget and now we have got this Universal Credit cut that's going to plunge a lot of people into poverty. You're new into the post as Education Secretary and I was extremely pleased to see you in that job, not least because you could not be worse than your predecessor.
That's damning.
If you're spending more on
Nick?
Sometimes it is not what
in fact, we are a national station. I took calls from people in Middlesbrough and Hartlepool and it was a mixed reaction. Put simply, they want to see more. Big on slogans, little on detail. Look, if optimism could heat our homes, we'd all be in a great place from yesterday. Sadly, it doesn't and we'll be paying the bill. (APPLAUSE).
Nadhim?
Hassan, Covid has been
6 billion.
In additional welfare
Okay, well, let's see
We are doing the right
We have got lots of hands
We heard Boris say
The man here.
I agree totally with
What video are you
She was singing "I've had
The Tories keep
The man in the pink.
I think the Universal
The Government always
Yes, they did, but if
On your point on Universal Credit which is meant to be helping people up the employment ladder, I guess what shocks me at the moment is the sort of speed of change with massive inflation across all sectors. The situation with energy which we don't own, which we should. We saw the closure of CF fertilisers, on the back of that no C02. The word for me that is missing out of the thinking and not taking anything away from Nadhim and the fantastic progress made with vaccination, I mean, incredible, and fantastic support in many ways for business, with furlough, bounce-back, hospitality grant loans, all of those other things. Now as we come out of it, we've got to tread slowly and carefully and make sure we don't leave anybody behind and these massively rising costs, you know, I think when we look at the wider aspect, 70 million people, you know, energy for 70 million people, food supply, the just-in-time way of working on food supply. We saw empty shelves. Everybody in this room would have experienced empty shelves. They couldn't buy what they wanted when they wanted. Those lessons seem to
Rosie?
Well, I watched Boris' speech yesterday and he talked a hell of a lot, but I didn't hear anything. It was all visions and right now; the country doesn't need visions, it needs things putting in place and policies and, actually, I found the speech quite scary. It felt quite like a Trump speech. He was able to excite
The woman in the red cardigan. Yes, you in the red cardigan.
The minister's answer focused on getting people back to work. My concern is that people have had benefits cut and can't get back to work. People who have disabilities. People who are not able to work. A personal friend of mine will face double fuel bills this winter and his benefits have been reduced. I think that's where we need to focus. A lot of people are going to be in a very dire situation this winter.
The woman in the front with the red scarf.
I've listened to what you've all said and I've particularly enjoyed the comment regarding Boris Johnson's speech. As far as I was concerned it was a masterclass in theatrical bombast, and what concerns me is this idea that this was an uplift for Universal Credit. It is about a bit like saying we're going to give you a pay rise, but we're going to take that money away when prices go up, which is what is happening.
At the moment the cost of living is rocketing. I work in a local supermarket and I have seen with my own eyes the fact that the shelves are emptying, people are saying, I only had somebody saying to me, she bought an item she buys regularly, gosh, it has gone up 10p, from 50p to 60p. The reality is the people who are at the most disadvantaged are going to be dreadfully badly hit and we have had enough of seeing in this country people going to foodbanks and people living on the streets and people unable to afford rent and yet we're still determined to make life even harder for the people who already have it hard.
The woman in the glasses. (APPLAUSE).
Yesterday the Prime Minister's speech, I think people were hoping for some substance and all they got was jokes. I'm sorry, but that's offensive. I work in an infants school and we work hard. Our children have been a complete privilege to work with throughout the Covid pandemic and we need help. We need help. We don't want to hear jokes. We want some action. We want some support. Our children deserve better. And to make jokes about things, there are serious things to talk about. There are serious things to do. Start acting. Stop joking. (APPLAUSE). [ DONE]
Can I just ask because... Is there anyone here who thought Boris' speech was what the conference needed? That they thought it was the right thing? Hang on a second, I'm asking the audience, are you agreeing or shaking your head. No, you didn't. Nadhim, I need to come back to you. Now, we select our audience carefully on Question Time to be politically represented. The largest group voted Conservative here and yet this is what you're hearing.
And I opened by saying to Hassan that we have been through an incredibly difficult period...
Yes, but everyone knows that because they have lived through it. What they're asking for is something to happen and a plan.
If you let me finish the sentence. We've put 407 billion into protecting jobs. I talked about the furlough scheme which Minette talked about. £0.5 billion for this winter to help those families that you are all talking about. The warm homes discount is for 780,000 pensioners and families on low incomes which will give them £150 off their fuel bills.
Why do you think that's not cutting through to people? Because you can list the pollees, but people don't seem to be hearing it.
Your question was focused on the Prime Minister's speech.
It wasn't my question, it was from the audience.
Many of the announcements were made before we got to Manchester. The adult social care reforms, 36 billion going into getting the information to catch up on the waiting list and then into adult social care, dealing with the - most families get, you know, absolutely taken apart if a member of the family has dementia and they may lose their home. Boris Johnson has dealt with it. I was a young Conservative going to successive party conferences and my own party couldn't deal with it in previous governments and Labour couldn't deal with it under Tony Blair, and Boris dealt with this and I think it is important to remember that the National Living Wage is putting £4,000 a year more in people's pockets. The economy, that support, that 407 billion that we've put in has meant that the economy has done better. There are 2 million people fewer out of work today than was forecast when the pandemic hit. Lisa Nandy, you said we're not doing anything on wind production. The United Kingdom today is 36%, almost 40% --
You passed legislation.
And Boris wants to quadruple that. Hold on a second, but you said we haven't done anything. All those things were done so the Prime Minister doesn't have to name every policy in his speech, his team, my job, and thank you to the early years teacher who was talking about the hard work because you've stayed open.
We announced £3,000 in bonuses for teachers in maths, physics and chemistry to those schools who need them most because those children have talent, they don't have opportunity. That's what we're doing.
Nadhim, there was no shortage of wind in Manchester and there is no shortage of wind here tonight in Aldershot with you. Let's be honest, is that a valid argument that the temporary uplift in Universal Credit has to be addressed? Yes. Why for the love of all that's holy, as these folk are looking and winter is running in and we look at our thermostats nervously, why would your party do it then and why couldn't you graduate it to help those people who need it most?
Nick, we announced as we arrived in Manchester, £0.5 billion for exactly those people...
Why aren't they getting it?
On helping if they need additional help with food or anything else, through Local Government and if you're going to criticise us on something, admit that we've done something about it for the most needy.
Okay, I'm going to move on and take another question. I just want to tell you that we will be in Nottingham next week. After that we're in Glasgow where we will be joined by the actor and the star of the HBO television drama, Succession, Brian Cox. Lisa is excited.
Come along and join the debate by being part of the audience. We'd love to see you. That's Nottingham next week and Glasgow the week after. Go on to our website and find the instructions on how to be part of our audience. Susan?
Allowing the mass slaughter of pigs that won't go into our food chain, what's gone wrong with our food production?
The obvious person is you, Minette, as head of the National Farmers' Union and a farmer.
This has been a really difficult time. It has been heartbreaking. 18 months ago, farmers were the key workers, they are providing 60% of the country's food and the point was made about foodbanks and austerity and here we are, the first country in the world facing a cull of healthy livestock, potentially up to 120,000 pigs. These pigs are under contract so these farmers, this doesn't stop, this doesn't end. These farmers are producing under contract for processors and retailers and so...
When you say a cull, we won't be eating these pigs, they will be incinerated and that's the end of it.
They will have to be destroyed on farm, either using a bolt gun or lethal injection which is a massive issue for the vets in this country who are there to save lives, not to shoot or destroy healthy livestock. As far as I'm concerned, this is the start and it has to be resolved.
Now we know that already some of these pigs are sadly having to be culled. It has to be resolved because this is livelihoods and this is people's businesses and unless we are saying to these farmers "We don't want a pig industry in this country", do you know what will happen then? We will import pigmeat that's produced to lower standards. What will that say to the consumer who wants high quality, high welfare British pork? This has been a human disaster for the pig farmers who are distraught. I must make a comment that George Eustice is doing everything he can as the Secretary of State in DEFRA and I believe Steve Barkley who is charged with saving Christmas yet again, I think it is the fourth Christmas we've saved, is doing everything he can, but we haven't got this over the line. I haven't been able to get to see either Kevin Foster or Priti Patel in the Home Office and it doesn't end there. When we talk about low skilled workers, these were the key workers. We have seen a daffodil harvest that didn't happen. We have seen hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of tomatoes wasted and these sectors are worth a lot to our economy.
Daffodils worth well over £1.3 million. We've got a flower sector that's worth £2 billion. The berry sector, we're self-sufficient in berries from April. It goes on and on and we have to resolve it. And the more we talk about low skilled, low paid, that's not the case. Butchers are on £15. Your staff nurse is on £13 an hour. So butchers are on £15 an hour, but we've got a shortage. We have got to have a dial down so we can sort this crisis and make sure that we have high quality British food on the shelves. It feels like farmers don't matter and we don't want to see British food produced in this country and that has to change. (APPLAUSE).
Lisa?
Well, farmers have been warning for months now that there is a problem with the shortage of abattoir workers and, you know, I heard what Minette said about individual ministers trying to do their bit, but what we need is the Prime Minister to get a grip on this because people are watching their livelihoods go up in smoke. My cousin is a farmer. I know how tough it is to have to work in that industry all year round with all of the pressures that are on people, but to have to slaughter perfectly well animals in the middle of a pandemic when we have seen food shortages, I mean, it really is quite an unbelievable place to have got to. There are things that could be done right now.
The National Farmers' Union has proposed a number of measures, including we have got temporary workers who are here and they're on temporary visas, they could switch to being able to work in the abattoirs but at the moment they have to go home in order to reapply, in order to come back and so the Government could take some steps right now that would ease the problem, but in the end, the only way that you fix this problem is to improve conditions in the industry. It is not necessarily about wages, it is not all about wages; it is about the conditions that people have to work in as well and this has been caused by a combination of factors, whether it is the global pandemic or the fact that we've had these changes to immigration rules. We've had 5 years to plan since Brexit and I don't care whether you voted leave or remain, I don't care if you didn't vote at all. Five years ago, this country took a decision that we were leaving the European Union. That means we've had 5 years under this government to plan. There should have been a taskforce to look at where the labour shortages would be. We should not be in a position where farmers are facing the prospect of having to slaughter perfectly well animals at a cost to the food supply chain simply because this government hasn't got a plan.
Yes?
I find this is a ridiculous and sad situation. We have food poverty in this country. We are throwing away decent food that could feed children who are going hungry. They've got to do something. It is just ridiculous. [Fiona Bruce] Nadhim, what's it come to this that pigs are being culled?
George Eustice is working with the abattoirs. Butchers are on the visa list. One thing is the English language requirement that we're looking at as well. A good deal of good work is taking place and the same, of course, with seasonal workers. We've increased that by 5,000 to 30,000. I represent the rural constituency of Stratford upon Avon and I've got Vale fresco that produces the salad for supermarkets and Wheelmore. I went to see both just to see what is happening and just to give you, bring it to life for you, Wheelmore said, "look, it is tough, but we're coping and we're doing well. We're going to invest because Rishi Sunak is giving a tax break, you get 25% of that back. We're going to invest in more machinery and invest in upskilling our people so they can work with that machinery."
But that's not going to help culling pigs, is it?
I thought I dealt with the issue around the visas on the abattoirs, but the temporary visas is not enough, we have got to go further and work with the industry on sustainable solutions to this.
Why has it come to this point? We have been asking for this, Nadhim, for a long time. Why has it come to this when people are losing their businesses?
The abattoirs have had a -- the China market close to them which is also impacted the industry here in the UK, but we are doing everything we can to make sure that we get things like the English language requirement resolved to make sure that we have the need for those abattoirs to process as fast as possible. This isn't something that, you know, has happened just in the UK. You're seeing global shortages everywhere because the global economy has rebounded rapidly post-pandemic. You're seeing it -- today, a few hours ago on the German economy, falling behind on manufacturing because of shortages of labour and this is happening globally. We're doing everything we can, in my view, to work with the farming community. I think you're right, yes, of course, Boris is right to say you've got to pay higher wages, invest in capital and you get the tax break on that, but we have got to be pragmatic and do what we're doing as we're doing because butchers are on the visa list to be able to come to this country and do that work.
We have got lots of hands up. Yes. You have got your hand up very high! The woman with the glasses at the back there.
I think the problem here is the elephant in the room and nobody wants to admit to it in the Government is Brexit. The Brexit movement was driven on an agenda driven by lies. Boris lied in his speech about the things that the Government are proposing to do. They have had 5 years to prepare for it, but there was no plan. The plan was for David Cameron to win back his backbenchers. The plan was to get out the foreigners, but you know, other than that, there was no economic basis in leaving the EU and this is just showing that, and I think the tide is turning.
The man in the blue shirt.
Is part of the issue the fact that we haven't been able to secure as many trade deals as we had been promised originally as part of the Brexit campaign? Secondly, from a seasonal worker prospective, if we're trying to employ people to come from abroad, why would you come abroad with temporary restrictions such as you can stay here for 2 months and help us out, but we don't want you after that. It is hypocritical and lunacy.
More of you voted for Brexit than against Brexit. Maybe you're having buyer remorse. The man in the tie.
It is about people not wanting to do the jobs on offer in abattoirs. Maybe it is the conditions, but it is a lot of people now don't want to cut up meat, there is a big vegetarian impact that's grown so much. How do we encourage British people into this trade? I don't know how long it takes to train a butcher, but I'm sure there has been no plans for training butchers at all.
Two years. It can't happen overnight, that's the point.
The man right at the back there.
Hi there. There is an irony when we're discussing Brexit. In my opinion, a lot of people voted for Brexit because they didn't want foreign workers coming over here and taking our jobs, and now that's exactly the situation that we've got. We've got a lack of foreign workers which is why we've got these shortages.
Can I just hear from someone - the majority of you voted for Brexit. We selected this audience carefully. I am assuming you didn't vote for Brexit.
I did.
And you're still saying that. Rosie?
I agree that the question links to the first question and that we are getting these labour shortages and you keep talking about the wage increases, but that means nothing if there is labour shortages so when the food prices rise and it is a case of inflation and the majority of people who will get a wage increase won't feel it because the cost of living will continue to increase.
Nick, the question allowing the mass slaughter of pigs that won't go into the food chain, what's happening with our food production?
Let's just pause for a second. It is actually not the fault of government that more young people seem to be attracted to vegetarianism and don't want to handle meat. Let's be fair. The Government doesn't control the condition in our abattoirs and demand be a butcher. Let's park that there. What you can control, Nadhim, is how people can get into this country. It is a very good point by the gentleman up the back that the whole idea was that we were going to have workers here and that needs to be addressed and if, as you promise, 1 day, workers in this country will have higher wages, good, but we find ourselves in a situation, almost I believe of a mirror of what we saw with the truck drivers, okay. And that became very difficult and we still have that affecting us and the drivers of the petrol tankers. The whole idea of Brexit was that we could control who we want to come in. I would urge you to go from here to talk to your colleagues in the employment department, whatever else it might be, let's switch on that tap now don't let's have the situation we had the hauliers.
The Prime Minister said he doesn't want to lift the lever of uncontrolled immigration.
It will be controlled. When the truckers crisis blew up, we can't get truckers in, but ballet dancers allowed into this country, I don't know about you guys, but I rely more on a trucker and pig farmer than a ballet dancer and you can probably tell why! Get the right people in and then train up.
Nadhim, I'm going to come back to you. So many people are having a bit of a go.
Let me address your point, Nick. You remember when countries like Poland joined the European Union. They said we would let people come and work in the UK. Germany said no, you will have a 7-year break until the wages in those countries begin to rise and we saw - Jack Straw admitted it, he said it was a mistake that we had that uncontrolled immigration which put pressure on wages here in the UK, and that's what Boris doesn't want to see. When he talks about, you know, we're not going to have uncontrolled immigration because he wants the students I look after, the skills that we're developing in boot camps, whether it is for HGV and we've had a phenomenal response to the boot camp that we're launching next month...
That must take as well.
When the head of Next is suggesting bringing people in, but paying them the same. He is suggesting bringing people in as paying them the same as British workers.
You have got to be pragmatic about it, the way we increased the seasonal workers...
The sector has a requirement for 80,000 seasonal workers.
I hear you, you've got to calibrate which is your point because as we want to transition the economy to a high wage, high skill economy as Wheelmore are doing. I spoke to one of the big distribution centres in Manchester, they're going from a warehouse with no automation to a warehouse with automation, but higher skills and higher wages because they're going to work with robots. That's the economy we want to see because they deserve higher skills and higher wages. My focus in my department is that by the end of this Parliament, we have a skills agenda that does deliver. We started off with apprenticeships under David Cameron and 2.5 billion into apprenticeships in the UK. We have a Skills Bill and it is about upskilling and reskilling. If you told me under Cameron that we would have a Prime Minister that would deliver a policy that at any time you can pull off modules and upskill and reskill, I would have bitten your arm off. Boris Johnson is delivering that in the lifetime skills guarantee.
All these unskilled jobs. We will never have a machine that will make a bed in a hotel. Are you classing that as unskilled?
No.
Are you classing people who pick strawberries and broccoli as unskilled? How do you get more skilled than picking a strawberry. They are skilled jobs and they are important jobs. The care sector is important.
Can I answer something...
What are the unskilled jobs then?
If you go to Wheelmore.
Wheelmore are having a fantastic night on the programme. Other companies are available. If you want to answer Minette's question.
If you go there and you will see on fresh fruit and veg, which is to your point, right, they're putting new capital to work for more machinery that can do everything from videoing how the...
You told us. We heard that.
They are all doing it.
What does that mean? Higher skills and higher wages, Minette. The same is happening across all sectors of the economy. That's a good thing.
Okay.
To Nick's point, you have got to work with industry to take us on that journey and not to go straight to, you know, the cheap labour that we gorged on because of uncontrolled migration.
It wasn't cheap labour. You're paying seasonal workers £15 an hour at the moment.
At the moment.
I'm going to move on. Well done Wheelmore. You had a big shout-out on Question Time. This has been your night! Okay. That's enough about Wheelmore! Let's take a question from Ian.
In view of his public denial, should Prince Andrew go to the States and face his accuser in court?
Right. Now, let's just get the facts here. Virginia Giuffre, an American woman, has accused Prince Andrew of sexually assaulting her three times in the States when she was underage there, which was 17. Prince Andrew denies it. He doesn't recall meeting her and there is a legal process going on here which we have to be aware of. Ian, I know from when you submitted this question...
Say that again.
I know when you submitted this question, you are a former police criminal investigator.
I'm a retired criminal investigator.
What's your view with that background?
It depends whether he has told the truth really.
He says he has.
If I was in his position, if I was telling the truth I'd want to go and see what corroborative evidence there is for this because in my line of work that I used to do, we would normally be looking for some corroborative evidence of an offence such as DNA or CCTV or independent witnesses. That kind of thing.
You think he should go to the States?
Well, yes, I do.
Nick, your view?
Because I don't fancy a night in the Tower, I hear what you say, Ian. This is how I'm going to sum it up. The Queen has been through the most trying period of her life, I would imagine, not that long ago, she lost her consort of goodness knows how many decades. She has also got the issues of one of her grandsons living in California. It is a as this woman continues to serve that she is blighted by problems such as this.
Whether it takes him to go to New York, Washington to do a videolink, whatever it takes to put this out of the way to let the Queen power on and do the job that I think she does particularly well, I'd urge him to do that. (APPLAUSE).
Lisa, should Prince Andrew go to the States and see his accuser in court?
Before Parliament, I worked with young girls who were preyed on by gangs and suffered the most horrendous circumstances. Every bit of the system is stacked against those young women, and sometimes young men, who come forward to allege abuse. It takes incredible bravery to do it and, whilst I'm not trying to prejudge any legal action in this case, I'm saying the fact that they don't have access to people in power and the fact that they're not believed and the fact so many times there is pressure put on them and their families to just shut up and go away instead of rocking the boat, all of that makes it far, far more important that people who are in positions of power adhere to the highest possible standards in these cases. That means being open. It means being transparent and it means making every effort to support the effort to have a fair hearing and a fair trial. So I agree with Nick and I think it is time some action was taken.
Do you think he should go to the States?
For a lot of people, a lot of women who don't see justice done, in this country, rape conviction is at their lowest level ever in this country. For a lot of women looking at the system, especially at the moment given everything that's happened over the last few months and especially what we've learnt about the killing of Sarah Everard in the last few weeks, for a lot of women in this country, they want to know that nobody is beyond the law.
The woman here in the check shirt.
No one is above the law including Prince Andrew. I don't think it should be a question of should he go to the US or not, like nobody is above the law.
The woman at the back there.
Thank you. I agree entirely with what Lisa Nandy said. It is a question of supporting women who are obviously coming forward with accusations that need to be followed through. I just wanted to say there have been 81 women murdered by a man since Sarah Everard died on 3rd March and in 2014, Her Majesty's inspectors of constabulary recommended that all police forces should have domestic abuse training.
Currently, in 2021, just over half the police forces in the country have had that training, and my question really, I know it is about Prince Andrew, but it is a wider question, why are local police forces allowed to make a decision that they will put domestic abuse lower down the training than any other training and it does not help when the Prime Minister says that the police force should be investigating serious crimes, which is what he said the other day.
Rosie, let's come back to the question. Should Prince Andrew, in view of his public denial, I want to reiterate again that Prince Andrew has denied and he has not been charged, he has denied the allegations, should Prince Andrew go to the States and face his accuser in court?
I agree with what a lot of people here said tonight. I don't care who he is. The pure fact of it, he is a man who has been accused of a serious sexual crime. It isn't a question - of course he needs to face that allegation. Of course.
Okay. Nadhim?
I think it is important to remember that Virginia Giuffre was caused great pain by Epstein. I think Lisa Nandy is right, that has to be foremost in our minds.
Jeffrey Epstein was a billionaire. He died in prison in 2019. He was awaiting trial on numerous sex-trafficking charges and he was an acquaintance of Prince Andrew's.
I think that due legal process has to take place. That's important. To the wider question around Sarah Everard and Wayne Couzens, the Home Secretary has announced a two-part inquiry. One into his conduct, his history, and was anything missed along the way, and then a second part is to take that inquiry and the learnings from it.
How can it be that the Government has a serious violence strategy and says violence against property is of the highest property for police forces but domestic abuse and sexual violence is not and that police forces need flexibility in order to decide whether it is a priority? Can you imagine any minister saying that about terrorism?
I hope you voted for the Domestic Abuse Bill. Lisa, I hope you voted for the...
One at a time.
The Domestic Abuse Bill widened the ability to prosecute men who commit domestic abuse.
How can this be right? Violence against property is deemed serious enough for all police forces to have to make it a top priority, but not domestic abuse or sexual violence. Why not? When will you address that?
When you look at our track record of going after domestic abuse or sexual violence, and I just wish we had your support on some of the votes that we had to put through Parliament.
The terrible case of Sarah Everard does for women's safety what Stephen Lawrence did for race in this country. They are on the same level and I'm not comparing tragic deaths in this fashion. For the Government to achieve something here, the inquiry that's been set up by Priti Patel has to have statutory powers. It has to be able to compel people to give evidence, otherwise it will get nowhere. The internal Met inquiry has not got statutory powers. I refer you to...
Witnesses can't be compelled to give evidence.
Evidence cannot be brought forward and witnesses can't be compelled. The Daniel Morgan review which found institutional corruption in the murder. The judge involved talked about the difficulty of getting papers because it was not statutory. I know that's an obscure legal term to many, but that is what has to happen if we are going to get something - the young lady in the black scarf says, if we're going to make this a watershed moment for what happened and what it achieved and Stephen Lawrence, this is the opportunity.
Let me hear from the audience. The woman in the black and yellow top.
With regard to Sarah Everard's murder, why are the Government not doing anything to educate people and combat the trend of victim blaming.
The woman in the white top.
Why are we letting people get away with these dibolical actions. Going back to the Prince Andrew thing...
He denies it and he has not been charged with anything.
What does it say about the respectability of the monarchy in the UK? It is going downhill. I have so much respect for the Queen, but why are we letting this happen? What's going on like women's safety in general? Why do I no longer feel safe...
That was a police officer. That was an incredible misuse of the power which must never be allowed to happen again. I would argue that's what we need to look for.
The woman in the front.
The Prince Andrew question, he should be - he should go to the States and he should be held accountable, but going back to what the lady said. The culture of misogyny of men treating women very badly indeed has gone on for far too long and for me, what is most concerning is that I believe there are a lot of cuts to women's services. Now a lot of these cuts in Universal Credit and other financial cuts are going to affect women most. Women are always the most vulnerable in society. They're always the ones in receipt of the most punitive financial cuts and just think we've got to re-think this.
We've got to change. Society has got to change. You mentioned Stephen Lawrence, which it is a very, very good example. That was like a template for reassessing racism, and Sarah Everard is the most revolting, disgusting thing that happened to a woman in a long time. But she is not the only one. We talk about her because it was a police officer who committed the crime, but what about - I can't think of her name off the top of my head.
Sabina Netta, the teacher.
There are so many women being killed by their partners every week and someone who has been accused of something like Prince Andrew and for someone of that elevation in terms of society, he needs to be held to account very, very seriously indeed.
Well, I just want to reiterate again, when you say he needs to be held to account, he has not been found guilty of anything, he has been accused of things, that's as much as we can say. Minette, should he go to the States and face Virginia Giuffre?
It really needs resolving and resolving as soon as possible.
Do you think that's the way to resolve it for him to go to the States?
It is hard to see how it will be resolved. It has gone on and on and it needs resolving. Briefly on the Sarah Everard point, we are all in the media, most of what we say...
Well, you are a farmer.
I'm standing up for my farmers at the moment and I'm in the media a lot and most of what we say is forgotten the next day or maybe an hour later even. When I listened to Sarah Everard's mother give that statement, I will remember that, I think, to my dying day because we've all got daughters, nieces, friends. We've got people who could have got in that car and would have done. I guess the question I am asking and what that family must be feeling is from March 3rd, why did it take from March 3rd to October to call for that inquiry? Because that's what I would want to know if I was her mother.
How, and the police do a fantastic job and I feel the police have paid a heavy price here for an inquiry that should have been called to see how the recruitment process failed catastrophically, there are evil people in the world. There will always, sadly, be evil people in the world, but that inquiry should have been called much, much earlier to find out how the recruitment process failed to allow a monster into the police force. The police do a great job and I feel they have had a collectively hard time over this, but that inquiry should have happened earlier.
It may have been tricky to have an inquiry before the trial. There could have been prejudicial issues there.
Because the police can't get an arrest straightaway. They're not bothered about it. They have got to get their crime rates up...
It takes time to solve, you mean.
Second, after this policeman got done, the media and other people, like the Government and everything, came out and said "oh" and the police were saying "maybe we should put undercover policemen". The women are going we don't want undercover policemen.
That was a suggestion about having under cover police officers in nightclubs.
Yes.
I want to know how the Government are going to change the fundamental opinions of men in the UK and that stems from education, you need to modernise the English literature curriculum and have books that encourage discussion about rape or sexual assault. We are looking at the society of Victoria, which is important, but it isn't encouraging conversation on what's going on now and actually, we need to give money to the police and that, but we need to solve the fundamental sickness in society that men have. We need to change attitudes.
Nadhim?
When I was a Minister for Children and Families, we brought in both relationship education at primary school, as compulsory and sex and relationship education at secondary school as compulsory as well and we did a lot of really deep thinking, hard work and consultation for that bit of the curriculum, and I think it is really -- teachers are doing a brilliant job delivering that.
We've got to go further. One of the things we've done, because of the Sarah Everard case, as part of our call for evidence, we've had 180,000 responses to that call of evidence. We've got a national police lead, Maggie Blyth who is started imminently looking at this and we're launching a 24/7 rape and sexual assault helpline because I think, to every point that's been made today, this is really important and it starts at school and we've got to teach, you know, children at school what healthy relationships look like and that's, you know, it is primary, as well as secondary.
Rosie?
Talking about women's safety in general. Right, now there is a government inquiry and a Met inquiry and I really feel like they are both -- I don't feel as a woman that either care about safety.
What would make you feel that they did care about safety if you're not happy with those inquiries?
Because they needed to do more. I feel like when we got a government where Dominic Raab doesn't know who -- is and I'm a woman, but also as a disabled woman, I don't feel safe at night. I don't feel safe with police officers. We need to get to a place where women, but also any minority, if you're a woman, if you're disabled, if you're in the LGBT spectrum, if you're a person of colour, the fact is right now in the UK, they don't feel safe at home at night and that is a scary place to live in.
Rosie, thank you. Right, so still a few hands up. Forgive me, you in the front. Our hour is up. I'm going to have to end it here.