Sarah? [DONE]
That’s the question everyone is asking at the moment. It is fantastic news that we’ve got the vaccine. It really is a moment to be proud, to be proud of all the scientists across the world working on all these vaccines and to have that light at the end of tunnel, when you are putting up your Christmas decorations you can think there will be an end to this because the vaccine is coming. It is brilliant. We know, and the scientists have been clear in the press conference with the prime minister, this is going to be very challenging logistically. Firstly, how is it going to be delivered and to whom. Of course, there are tiers of people that are going to get it first. But I don’t know about you, but my MP WhatsApp groups have been buzzing all day with people saying we heard there’s going to be a hospital here doing it, a hospital there, but what about our area?
Liam.[DONE]
Vaccines mark a major advance in human achievement since the enlightenment into the 19th Century and Britain’s been at the forefront of those achievements over the years and decades. But this isn’t the time for vaccine nationalism. I agree we should congratulate all the scientists, those in Belgium, the States, British scientists working in international teams here in the UK, with AstraZeneca --
What about the logistical capabilities?
They are obviously forefront now, now we’ve got a vaccine that’s been approved. It’s good -- I’m reassured that the British Army are going to be involved. They’re absolute world experts at rolling out things, complex logistic capabilities. This is probably going to be the biggest logistical exercise that our armed forces have undertaken since the Falklands War, which I’m old enough to remember, just about. So, as a neutral I’d like to see a lot of cross-party cooperation, and I’m encouraged with Sarah’s tone, everybody wants to see us getting on with it now. They don’t want to see competition on whose vaccine is best. There will be some instances where the Pfizer vaccine works better, another where you can’t have cold refrigeration, across the developing world as well, a cheaper vaccine like the AstraZeneca works better. Let’s keep our fingers crossed and hope we make a good job of this.
What prompted you to ask this? Do you have concerns or what’s behind it? [Coleen]: Well, we haven’t really covered ourselves in glory so far at any logistical exercise. I mean with the PPE, test and trace, any of the things that have had to be done to do with Covid. So, yes, I have got concerns. I also think maybe the government should be managing expectations better. They seem to come out and say everything is going to be done by springtime. I think that’s highly unlikely given the record. I don’t know that a lot has been gained by suggesting that. It will be great if the military is involved. I think it will be much better if the military was involved in the command and control rather than just the delivery side. I hope that’s the case.
Are we going to be let down by logistics capabilities?
No. I can totally understand why people are concerned and nervous at this stage. We’ve got this far, it is good news. But we made it very clear as a government this is a massive logistical challenge, but one that our NHS is up to, the same NHS that got us through this pandemic. Fantastic people, including in my own constituency that worked tirelessly to support us. We have a plan, we’re going to do this, we’re going to do it together, but this isn’t going to happen overnight. We need to be realistic about that. To be successful we need to green-light other vaccinations. This is the first one. It depends on the manufacture of these vaccinations. So it is out of our control as well. It is a long process. Hope and help is here, but there’s a long way to go.[DONE]
Can I just ask you, the government and Jonathan Van-Tam have been saying today the aim is to get it to care homes first, but there are difficulties with this vaccine because it has to be stored at such a cold temperature so it’s not getting to care homes first. But in Scotland, the Scottish health says care home residents will have it from 14 December. What are they able to do that we can’t?
My understanding is you can’t break up --
No, why are they able to do it and we’re not able to do it?
It is about breaking them up. That needs the approval to do that so you’re not wasting vaccines --
That’s true for the Scottish government as well. Is what they are saying is not right or --
I can’t speak to the exact comment. It may be they are banking on the approval coming. We said throughout for a number of weeks now that our priority is care homes and making sure we get that vaccination in there as quickly as possible. We have to do that and we will be doing it as soon as we can.
Peter, in terms of the logistics, a fantastic breakthrough to have a vaccine, never mind a couple coming down the pipeline. What about getting it out to people?
This is a tremendous triumph of science that we got this far. I think we are up to the logistic challenge and that’s because we have a system in the NHS that can deliver vaccines at scale. We have tremendous networks which are already present throughout the country. I don’t think we need to put in a whole new command and control system in order to do this because we do have the people already up for this particular challenge. I think the problem about breaking up the batches and getting them out into care homes is an important one. We know the best way to deliver vaccines is at the point where people are assembled in work places, schools, so on. We always know that’s the best way to do it. So I think we must find ways of getting around the logistical problems, which are because of having only four stages that you’re allowed by the regulations to stage this vaccine as it comes from the factory into the delivery points. But I think that is surmountable. It just needs a lot of work.
Tom?[DONE]
From my point of view it has been a magical couple of days, the news that’s coming through. It feels like there’s an end to this nightmare we have all been living. There’s short-term excitement about it, long term there are the problems of getting everybody vaccinated to make sure we can get our lives back to normal and running in that space. Yes, we have a poor track record how we’ve dealt with coronavirus. I have to be honest. You look at the way that the whole thing has been dealt with, you look at the track and trace system, it is something that we have struggled with. There have been bold claims about it and we’re still struggling with this now. So I can understand people’s worry, Colleen’s point of view are we going to fall into the same trap where it comes to rolling out the logistics of this. However, logistics isn’t falling into the tech problem where we’re trying to get everybody to download apps; it is more about getting close to people and resolving it. So, yes, I think if there are the army brought in, if there is people who are all over this have an understanding of how logistics work, it isn’t the same as the track and trace system, so it gives hope that perhaps there is something coming through the other side, that we will, eventually, get something right during this.[DONE]
Lots of hands. Beth. [Beth]: It has been a difficult year for everybody and I think news of this vaccine is a huge encouragement, the end is in sight. Also it is a very quick vaccine in the fact it has to be stored at -70C, it can’t be kept in the fridge like most normal ones can. Who’s going to be receiving it first in care homes and other facilities that perhaps aren’t geared to catering for this type of refrigeration, that could be an additional logistical challenge. But I think noticing the fact we’ve managed to produce this vaccine, scientists and research managed to produce this vaccine in a matter of months is a remarkable feat. I think the logistical side of it will be realistically easy compared to developing the vaccine in the first place.
Patrick?
Lawrence?
Michelle, let me ask you about that. The question about is Brexit going to slow down the import of the vaccine into this, then talk of an immunity passport which was hinted at, then dismissed by Michael Gove.
As a government we’ve not got plans to introduce a passport or anything like that, of that nature. Of course, businesses may look to do that in the future, but the key thing here needs to be promoting the vaccine and getting the rest of those vaccines green lit so we can start the roll-out properly and effectively.
Are you concerned after 31 December we might have a problem getting the vaccines as speedily as we like?
The negotiations are going on, we know that. They are going to the wire, we all appreciate that. They are still going on. We have done endless preparations for every eventuality. 705 million into our borders. We are prepared, should that happen, either way.
Peter, have you any concerns about that, in terms of medicines coming across, but vaccines in particular after 31 December, is that something you discussed as scientists? [DONE]
I desperately hope not. It would be an absolute disaster if it were to cause problems with transport of medicine -- other medicine as well as vaccines. I think it highlights an issue we have all been concerned about in the arena is that a lot of our medicine absolutely sure the supply is going to be uninterrupted. We have often quite shore supply trains, not very large stocks, of a lot of medications. I think this illustrates that problem. But I hope it will be overcome. It is a political problem rather than a scientific one.
Since we mentioned the Brexit word, and there was a time in this programme, believe you me, when we mentioned nothing but, let’s take a question from Katherine Hodges. [DONE][Katherine]: Has our departure from the European Union helped in speeding up the process of speeding up the vaccine?
Michelle, just clarify where we stand with this. We heard a number of things about this from various people in the government today.
This is a global pandemic, it has been a global response and including --
Has leaving the European Union sped it up as Mathew Hancock suggested?
Our regulator approved it. The European Union decided to back their regulator. It wasn’t against European rules for them to have deviated, each independent state, they chose not to do that.
The important thing -- the question is has leaving the European Union helped in speeding up the process. The health Secretary said we all do the safety checks but we have been able to speed it up because of Brexit. Is that right?
As I said, the Europeans have collectively utilised one regulator, we have our own regulator and they adopted different processes here. We have given them rolling results throughout --
Have we been able to do it more quickly?
Yes, we have been able to do it more quickly because of rolling results, they tested it sequentially, that speeded up the process. But it hasn’t cut corners around the safety. That is why we can be confident this vaccine will work, it will be effective and it won’t have the side effects you might worry about thinking golly, this has been done so quickly.
Are you concerned that Mathew Hancock said that, also Gavin Williamson saying we have the best people in this country, we have the best medical regulators, better than the French, better than the Belgians, we’re a much better country than all of them, including the U.S. Then you have Anthony Fauci responding saying the UK took the data from Pfizer and instead of scrutinising it said okay, let’s approve it, that’s it. You also have the European Union kicking back again.
We should all have faith in this vaccination. We shouldn’t be afraid of talking up our country and the people that work in it and the amazing scientists that have worked on the process here, the regulation, getting it through in time. It is a fantastic achievement. But it is also a worldwide achievement. And we’re relying on a catalogue of other vaccinations produced across the globe.[DONE]
Peter?
I think the MRHA is one of the most respected bodies internationally. They are extraordinarily careful in the way they scrutinise medicine to make sure they are safe. I have no worry at all about the way they scrutinised the data on the Pfizer BioNTech vaccine. I think it is very, very important that medicines are properly regulated and we do have a proud record of it. I don’t think it has been affected by Brexit because this is a message regulation that has gone through all the due processes. I would be very happy, indeed, to be given this vaccine tomorrow if it was offered to me. [DONE]
So I’m just wondering what you make of the responses that we’ve had today from the European Union, from Anthony Fauci, for example, who -- well, it is suggested they feel a bit stung by what has been said over here?
I think there is unfortunate international competition being set up. This is really us against the virus; it is not us against the Americans, us against the Europeans. We all ought to be pulling together to do everything we can to defeat this virus, and just speaking with one voice. I think it is very unfortunate, indeed, if we are trying to divide opinions on this matter. It is quite clear it has been very carefully scrutinised and I have no concerns about it. [DONE]
It’s almost like when you are a parent and you think your kids are the best and the cutest, but you don’t tell all the other parents you have the best and the cutest. It seems crass to say we’re the best country, aren’t we great. Oh it was because of Brexit, that was my policy. That’s not the point of what we’re we’re doing here. As it happens, I worked on the Olympics, I did a lot of work about global branding what the world thinks about us. As it happens, the world has a good view of us in terms of our ability to make things, get things done. If something is made in Great Britain, people trust it around the world. We are high up in terms of respect for what we do and who we are. We don’t need to use crass comments and shout about it. People know we’re good at science and we’re good at what we do, but so is the rest of the world. This is a time for all of us to celebrate what has happened, to come together, and not to try to make some cheap points, I think.
Alex.[DONE]
Tom.
It felt toe curlingly cringy this morning. The words coming out. To turn it into a political point-scoring space race. How the scien has worked together to make this happen has been amazing. Lots of vaccines being announced at pretty much the same time. Clearly the scientists have been working together to create something that solves a world problem. It is something that we should all be so proud of. This morning those comments coming out, it puts you -- it’s that bit where you talk about your child, he’s the best, whatever. I find it quite embarrassing this morning, those comments. It was a little toe-curling.
Patrick. You have your hand up.
Mathew T, I’m calling you Mathew T because we have two Matthews in our audience.
Instead of saying crass comments, how would the Panel suggest we should collaborate with other nations better during this whole vaccine roll-out?
That is a big question. Liam, feel free to tackle that, but the original question, has our departure from the European Union speeded up the process?[DONE]
In response to the original question, people can take from this what they will. It’s kind of depressing that we’re still fighting the referendum of June 2016 even at this late stage. As a point of fact, the EU could have invoked emergency powers to speed up the emergency process but it chose not to. If we were still part of the European Union we would be part of that collective decision. We decided to not be part of that and that’s why, as a point of fact, we were able to approve this vaccine slightly quicker.
Individual countries can approve emergency powers even within the EU.
They can in principle, but they agreed between them not to do that. That’s just factually accurate. That’s what it is. What I didn’t like, the European Medical Agency again, yesterday, Mr Gavin Williams’s comments, which I agree were completely crass and if it were a joke it went badly wrong, the European Medical Agency yesterday was casting aspersions on our regulatory testing regime when the WHO has described as world class. It is not a nationalistic thing to say, it is just a point of fact. Once you get into this folly of different parts of the world, politicians chest-beating saying our regulations are better than your regulations, as people with public platforms, scientists, journalists, we have a big responsibility here. Quite a lot of our population, and maybe we’ll come on to this, is concerned about taking the vaccine, a smaller proportion here than in our European countries and across the world. We don’t want to get into a Dutch auction of whose regulator is better. We did do the phase 1, 2 and 3 tests here. The Chinese and Russians are rolling out vaccines before they do the phase 3 tests. It was good to hear from Peter, and indeed from our audience, why it is we’ve managed to truncate this by doing different things in parallel. Vaccines take years, but you are trying to generate funding. We obviously don’t have that. I would like to do so us getting beyond this vaccine nationalism, which I think Gavin’s comments played into. We’ve all had enough of this virus around the world. We want to see our leaders getting on, supporting each other, calling out regulatory slips where we can see them happening, but supporting each other when we can see that responsible regulatory bodies are doing their job, whoever gets there first.
Why can people pile into shopping centres by the thousands but less than 100 people can sit at pub tables?[DONE]
Mathew, are you asking this from personal experience?
Yes. You can control femme in ha pub whereas in shopping centres people run around wherever they want.
Do you work in a pub.
Yes.
Are you working at the moment.
No I’m on furlough at the moment.
I’m assuming because Bath is in Tier 2, you must be outside in a Tier 3 area?
Just outside. Literally 200 yards my pub is from being in Tier 2.
Right. Tom, I’m going to come to you first.
Hospitality is being -- like Mathew was saying -- has been hugely exposed through all of this pandemic. The industry that has been at the frontline as well as travel, tourism, aviation, they’ve all been hit massively but from my point of view hospitality is under a huge amount of pressure right now. We’re able to open 200 yards away from Mathew, but you’re not now. All these contradictory questions. The problem that you come across is so many pubs, so many restaurants, so many hotels have spent so much money over a period of time being able to reopen, reinvest, try to make themselves Covid-secure, trying to make sure health and safety is being adhered to, risk assessments done, PE, social distancing, so we get through that first lockdown period where, to be fair to the government, the furlough scheme that Matthew is on has been helpful from a staffing point of view, but moving forward to open within the industry it needs much more help. There are pubs closed now losing thousands upon thousands of pounds.
What would you like to see happen?
First of all, we need plenty of investment. We need --
The government has proposed a grant of £1,000 to pubs that can’t --
It’s 40 million by the time you break that down to wet led pubs, think have been --
Just to be clear because not everyone is familiar with the terminology. That’s a pub that doesn’t serve substantial meals, just drinks and snacks.
The community pubs, the places that people go and meet, the places that are the centre of people’s hearts and so you also, these have been massively hit. The places that don’t serve a Scotch egg.
With a pickle on the side. [DONE]
So the grant -- I interrupt to just explain what the word meant, but we were talking about the grant from the government.
By the time that 40 million has been spread out to the wet led pubs, they have not had the VAT cut. So they haven’t got the 15 percent which the government have helped which has been helpful for food, hotels and accommodation. But these pubs have had that break. Those pubs make small margins, there’s small margins in hospitality anyway. But the actual spend --
You have a representative of the government here. What would you like the government to do.
The VAT cut should be pushed on to wet led pubs, on to alcohol. The idea that the restrictions that you make that people are not allowed to go into pubs unless they’re having something to eat, the conversation that Matthew -- the question he’s asking about shopping centres or pubs, I mean there is no real difference. We’re all grown adults, surely you’re able to go out, have a drink socially rather than shopping. The idea that alcohol is driven to people’s behaviour, the way that it changes, there are plenty of people that enjoy socially mixing, under Covid environments, making sure they can be there. That VAT cut should be put on pubs.[DONE]
I totally agree with you. Pubs have gone above and beyond to be Covid-secure. It has been awful, I’ve seen it in my own constituency with staff having to be furloughed. The £1,000 I don’t think we can target and focus on that because that’s part of the bigger context. A pub that has to close at the moment gets £3,000, they got up to 25,000 in the first tranche, there is the furlough scheme, there’s also the VAT down to 5 percent for --
Not on wet led pubs.
I’m saying this is part of a broader package. It won’t be applicable to all of them, but the majority is to most. So we can’t just focus on that £1,000. The prime minister was announcing that as additional support and additional help. I hear what you’re saying about why have pubs been unfairly hit or targeted. No politician wants to make these choices. I didn’t enter politics to shut down pubs.
you can make the choice to give more support to pubs.
Why are we making these decisions in the first place and it is fundamentally for public health and safety and directed by the science.
Transmissional rates in hospitality was at 3 percent. Between 3 and 5 percent within hospitality.
10 percent of the workforce, hospitality.
Also employs over 3 million people. It sat there with -- we saw the “eat out to help out” schemes. Places where the infection rates did not rise then. Infection rate rises came and students were moving up and down --
I don’t think we should blame students.
The students aren’t to blame, it is the movement of people.
Peter, do you want to pitch in here since you are the man looking at this evidence as a scientist. [DONE]
I think it is very clear there are things that transmit the virus very well and that’s often in venues where there’s poor ventilation, loud music, people have to shout to overcome the noise, then you’re emitting a lot of spittle particles that transmit the virus. If you have a quiet environment with well ventilated areas, where you can have social ventilation, and there are well-managed places you can have a meal and drink a pint at the same time where the transmission rate is very, very low. But loud music and shouting in a close environment is per for the transmission of the virus.
If there was a pub that wasn’t playing music would you be happy to go there.
I would be comfortable to go into a pub that was quiet, well-ventilated and you could keep your distance from people.
This is an industry that is on its knees. These are places that are closing. It’s an industry that was struggling before Covid came along. Now we’re at a point where many loans have been taken out to get to reopen. Then being put into tier systems where the evidence for their closing has been very selective from a case study --
I’m sorry to interrupt you. I have to let everybody in as well. But you feel so passionately about it. It is the heart and soul of what you do. Let’s hear from our audience. Jai. [Jai]: This is an argument that is going to rumble on for months to come. Don’t we all think it is time that we have a minister in partly for hospitality.
Tom is nodding at that.
He wants the job! .
It could be a new gig for you.
Anya.[DONE]
As I said, the hospitality sector employs 10 percent of the workforce. It doesn’t give me any pleasure to say it but we’re facing a tsunami of unemployment here. With the best will in the world even though the vaccine is well on the way, Amen to that, we could have another six months of lockdown. I personally think we need to be smarter about how we lockdown. Locking us down by region is too much of a blunt instrument. Look at the case of Kent where you have high infections on the Medway towns but in rural Kent some of the lowest infection rates in the country. The Covid recovery group pushed the prime minister to say he wants to be more granular, breaking down regions into particular areas so that country pub where our resident scientist says there really is no danger so long as it is well-ventilated, that’s a family with their house, their mortgage, the life savings on the line, and Tom is nodding from the waist. So we have to help businesses get through what could be another six months of this. We can offer more help, we want to see that, but we’re borrowing £400 billion this year -- in a single year. This is outlandish amounts of money. There has to be a limit to throwing money at a situation. It’s costing us £1 billion a day.
If it is not a question of money, what do you suggest it is?[DONE]
I think we need to lock down in a much more granular fashion, more geographical specific. It is often poohed-poohed but I think there’s a case for age stratification. Letting the younger generation get out there, do their thing, shielding the elderly if they want to be shielded. People say that’s impossible because there are multi-generational households. 9 percent of all households, people of working age, do not live with anyone over 65 where the vast majority of Covid fatalities and Covid cases occur. We can use unused hotels where you have multi-generational families so workers aren’; coming home and, in the unfortunate phrase “killing their granule I didn’t say.” It’s not money we’re spending every day in the terms of furlough and business support, it is the taxes we’re not raising. Unless we’re going to have a major economic overhang going on for years and years and years and a difficulty of funding infrastructure, all the things we need going forward, we have to get our economy moving again.
Peter, since we have you here, it is an argument that a number of people have raised, this idea of stratification, as you called it, shielding certain sections of the population, letting others have more freedom, are you convinced by that?[DONE]
I think we know if we try that then it is going to eventually work its way up to the most vulnerable. There is very good evidence that the most vulnerable are able to screen themselves off still and there’s a declining rate of disease transmission in those most vulnerable people. But we have seen in many locations when you try to allow the rates to go up a little bit in order to open businesses, inevitably it does percolate through into the vulnerability population. It is a difficult problem. I hope we can get the vaccines into those vulnerable populations so that effect won’t occur. [DONE]
I completely agree with Liam’s frustration, but I don’t agree with his solution. I think there are several things here. The first is, in defence of the tier system, which I will do on behalf of the government, when you decide that you’re not going to have complete lockdown with everyone staying at home and you decide you’re not going to have the absolute opposite, you have to draw the line somewhere. There will always be real horrible peculiarities in the way you draw that line because things will not make sense in the area where the line is drawn. The second point is where you draw that line and you say to pubs you can’t make a living now properly and you have to provide the support, and the support they are getting now is a third of what it was. In areas where they have been in lockdown for months, they are getting the additional grant, you get the same if you are in the Isle of Wight as if you are in Manchester. That’s not fair. In April what’s going to happen, there’s a new tax regime, you have to start paying business rates again, start paying back all this debt. There’s a cut-off point at the start of the financial year which the government has to address. Surely we can work our way out of the tiers not just by relying on the vaccine by having the test and trace, having all the systems in place so we reduce the spread of this without just waiting for the vaccine. Because that is going to take --
I would say once you have the 3.2 million people over 80 safely vaccinated, then you can start moving towards a more age stratified approach. We have a lot of smart people in this country, I agree with the education secretary at least on that. We have to be cleverer rather than just a blunt instrument of regional lockdowns.
I want to fit in a few more questions. Alex Hunt.[DONE]
When we had the referendum the key theme was taking back control of our money, our borders, our laws, including fishing rights. I don’t think it is unreasonable as an independent sovereign state we want to have control over the water and the fishing rights. We’re not asking for something that’s unreasonable from the EU or something they have not given to other nations. So this is an important thing. Those negotiations are still going on. There is still the hope we will get a deal in time.
Can I ask you because our political editor Laura Kuenssberg is reporting that the negotiations are going less well and the EU is throwing in a few new added things to be discussed. What light can you shed on that?[DONE]
As you will know Laura’s not in the negotiations, neither am I.
I was just wondering if -- what you can tell us about that.
We’ll find out over the coming days exactly what’s happening. We have been very clear throughout this, whether we get a deal or not we’re going to make a success of this. I don be it is helpful talking all the time about the withdrawal agreement --
That’s not a trade deal.
I think we’re always harking back to where we were a while ago. This no deal rhetoric, really.[DONE]
Sarah?
I was last on this programme on 30 January which was the day before we left the EU, and I can remember saying: We have no idea yet what the deal is anything to -- actual final deal is going to look like. We still have no idea what the final deal is going to look like 10 months later. It is ridiculous. The fact the government have got to this point where we are right at the cusp of the cut-off point is very bad management and it’s a very poor show. I think we know the deal is going to be thinner than it was promised to be. We were promised all bells and whistles and it is going to be thinner. There are significant issues we need to worry about. The government has told us the deal is there to be done. I am prepared to take them at their word and maybe the deal will be done and I hope it will. But I know the haulage industry, the logistic centuries are very worried about what’s going to happen. The government need to do what they said they were going to do, support businesses through Covid, then we need to look beyond, what kind of country are we going to build. How we’re going to build an economy next year is going to take more than Rishi Sunac in a fancy cashmere sweater telling us he is going to freeze public sector pay. We need a plan for what is the strategy going forward.
Would you have preferred the negotiators to have given in earlier and not stood by Britain’s interest.
I would have preferred the prime minister to be correct when he said I will get the deal in July, which is what he promised in June, he said he would have the deal in July. He didn’t. He was confident the deal was oven-ready in December. We haven’t seen it. If you’re in manufacturing now, how can you encourage investment from abroad if you don’t know if you’re going to be under a tariff regime in a few weeks time. If you’re a farmer, how can you plan for the future if you don’t know what the tariff regime is going to be. Our financial services are already making the decision to go elsewhere because all this uncertainty means people have no idea what’s ahead. That’s bad management from government. [DONE]
It’s an active negotiation.
Peter, you wanted to come in.
I think it is desperately important that there is attention paid to scientific collaboration in the negotiations over Brexit. We know the collaborations we’ve had over the past few decades within the EU have been absolutely vital in driving big science. That’s the way science is going, it is very collaborative, very international, and we benefited hugely from the European funding system where every 5 million we put in we get 8.6 million back. So this is a very, very important point for UK universities, for UK science, that we get a really good deal in terms of being able still to continue all that collaboration.
Liam?
We have a withdrawal agreement. What we are after now is a trading agreement. So we don’t trade on World Health Organisation terms. If we do, it will be low on some sectors, high on others. The money we don’t spend in Brussels, maybe the 10 billion a year can be spent on other areas. I think there will be. The EU has a trade deficit of almost £100 billion. That’s hundreds of thousands of jobs in Germany and France. So I think the European Union wants a deal. But I share the frustration because on the surface fishing is a small percentage of the economy. It is even smaller in France. Macron has a fight on his hands in the 2022 election, not just from Marie la Penn but fishermen and the north of France. Look at what we are considering here. I study the issue closely, it is always the Brits, represented by our own media, who are represented as being unreasonable.
You are passionate of the media. [DONE]
I’m a freelance journalist. This was cobbled together quickly as Britain was entering in 1973 and for the cost of a lunch with George Pompidou, Edward Heath at the last-minute said you can enter our fishing waters. Now we get to a situation where two-thirds of fish in British waters are caught by non-British boats. That can’t be right. This is a kind of Colonial relationship where some independent countries have a hold over the sources of another now sovereign, independent country. And the reason fishing is such a small percentage of our economy is because it has been decimated. It’s been decimated in some of the poorest areas of the country.
Over 50 percent of the fishing quota has been sold to foreign companies.
Because our industry can’t get an economic foothold because it has been so marginalised. By the way, lots of my friend in the Green Party, for many years were against the fishing policy because it has led to over fishing. If we had a British fishing policy we could allow stocks to replenish in our British waters. Why can’t we have the same deal the Norwegians have. That’s why they didn’t join the economic community as well in 1937, where they renegotiate, every year, fair and square.[DONE]
Let’s hear from some of our audience who have their hand up. Steph.
The oven-ready deal was with reference to the withdrawal agreement -- you correct me if I’m wrong about that Michelle. Matthew B.
If we take back our waters, how are we going to police them?
Michelle, do you have a view on that?
This is about taking back control of not just our waters as we said in that referendum but also our laws, our borders and our money.
Mathew is asking about policing it.
So this is about the agreements that we have. I don’t think we are anticipating that if we enter into agreements with other countries that suddenly they are not going to be respected en mass at all.
Obviously we had cod wars before so it wouldn’t be entirely unprecedented.
From an industry that needs a deal to come through as quickly as possible, it is the uncertainty of being able to move forward. Time is running out very, very quickly. Personally speaking, any deal is going to be better than no deal. The way that the prices are going to rise, the way -- the uncertainty of the market. We are not a self-sufficient country. You know, we export -- we only produce 70 percent of the meat that we need in this country for us. We import at least 30 percent. We have the trade tariffs that need to be sorted out. Time is running out so rapidly, as we get to the end of Covid 19, we are at Brexit. You know, all of these pressures that it’s put us under, there’s so much where hospitality can bring to the forefront of regenerating, of being part of the high street. We talk about high streets and retail bid in trouble. A retail experience generating movement, cash, everything flowing, without hospitality being a part of that, why would you be going to the high street? How do we drive things forward? We need a solid foundation. We need the Brexit deals decided, we need to be able to move forward. We need to future-proof the hospitality industry. It is the beating heart and soul of communities. That’s the other thing that we’re forgetting here when we talk about the offers that we put in. It is not just what we sell. We don’t just sell food and drink, we give the fabric of society -- it’s intertwined with meeting up, being a whole part of it. That is a foundation as a whole country, no matter what buisness it is , to be able to drive forward.
We don’t have much time left but one more question from F.. [Georgia]: Due to the Covid crisis teaching across universities has been dire. Some students are only receiving 2-hours a week, creating 289 per in-person session this semester. How can you justify charging this amount, especially to those in lower socio-economic brackets.
I’m assuming you’re a university student, Georgia. What has your experience been? [Georgia]: It has been difficult in terms of Covid. Last year we were dismissed from university early, earlier than expected. It has become very prevalent that corona is not going anywhere. But the management within many universities has been rather abysmal, in my opinion, we haven’t received the education we’ve been promised. We haven’t received the resources we’ve been promised. Everything has been put on hold. As a student I’m still paying obscene fees for minimal education.
I’m going to go around quickly but I thought it was an important question. Liam.
I have two school age children, one at university. But just as a citizen not just a dad my heart breaks for people. That’s why I wanted to see more age stratified lockdown. Older lecturers, older teachers who are vulnerable, who have pre-exiting conditions, they can supported financially while shielding, but we have been far too quick to close down schools and, for the most part, universities. It really for me sticks in the craw. I would like to see universities refunding students part of these fees they’re paying particularly, as we’ve heard, students from lower socio-economic groups.
Peter?[DONE]
I think it has been an incredibly tough year not only for students but also for staff. You know, my colleagues at Imperial have been working day and night to try to make it safe to teach. Many universities have succeeded really well. There have been very few in-class transmissions of the virus and there has been quite a lot of transmission, but that’s mostly due to students being social, which is what they come to university for. I think it is patchy, but I do want to acknowledge the huge effort that has been put in by many people at universities and by hugely dedicated people who are trying to deliver teaching under very difficult circumstances.
Sarah, Georgia’s question is that she’s feeling short changed.
I do sympathise. I know there has been some repayment made from -- is it Manchester University has made some accommodation.
Yes, for accommodation, not for teaching. [DONE]
Other universities are looking at some of those things. I think the government should look at that as well and see whether there’s support they can give. But the absolute key has to be we crack this thing and we make sure we come back to normal as quickly as possible so everybody has to adhere to the rules, we have to --
Do you think that students like Georgia should be reimbursed?
That’s what we need to look at. There will have been different experiences for different students. It will be a different experience depending what university you’re at and what you do.
I did two degrees. Most people that taught me were under 40. Why can’t that kind of teaching carry on?
Tom.
Being a student is an incredibly expensive thing these days. You come out with debt. It is not just being a student. If you are spending money on something and expecting 100 percent bang for it but you’re not getting it, you’re only getting 50 per cent of what you paid 100 percent for, surely you want 50 percent back. Students should be getting their money back. [DONE]
This has been a really difficult time for students. I try to empathise and understand, not having been at university during this time I can only try to do that, because it has been really difficult. But we as a government set the minimum tuition fees and universities, if they want to charge that maximum, we have been very clear, they have to ensure the quality is maintained, they have to ensure the quantity is maintained. They have to ensure that tuition is accessible. If you don’t think you have been getting that, then I would urge you to make a formal complaint to your university. There’s a process in place --
You think the universities should pay up if students fell or are able to prove they haven’t had enough teaching?
I have seen wonderful examples of blended learning, where universities have gone to produce great learning. Just because it is online doesn’t mean it is inferior. Not at all. Are there some students that feel dissatisfied? Absolutely. We heard that. There’s a process in place for them. They complain to their university, then they can go to the OIA, the office of the independent adjudicator. They can get fashionable re didn’t understand or full refund based on that.
Have any students succeeded in that.
Yes, in the past before as well with the strikes that we saw. There were a number of students going through that. Obviously there’s a time lag because they do the complaint first to the university. Nobody is denying it hasn’t been difficult, of course it has. But a number of universities have really invested in that blended learning model. But I totally take on board the comments and recognise the process that should be followed.
Georgia, does that answer your question? [DONE]
That’s a satisfied customer. That’s what you like to hear.