Michael Buerk:	Our next witness is Tom Fyans, who's director of campaigns and policy at the Campaign to Protect Rural England, the CPRE. Some green belt land is beautiful, but a lot isn't. It's far bigger than it was originally intended, and the country's desperate for housing. A human is less important than hedgerows?
Tom Fyans:	Of course not, but it's also the most popular planning tool we've had since the war. It is to prevent urban sprawl, to stop growth, to promote urban regeneration ... but most importantly in a lot of ways now, it's the countryside next door for 30 million people. So when we talk about their wellbeing, the origins of the green belt were green lawns around the cities, for the workers to escape from the industrial conditions they were in for their health and wellbeing ... that's what it was for, it still happens now. There's a huge store of national capital in the green belt, it's worth preserving, we should be very proud of it, the world is envious of the green belt and has tried to copy it.
Michael Buerk:	George
George Buskell:	Surely the issue is that the green belt's almost completely outdated by now. I mean, last I checked, it's not 1955 any more and any policy that lasts that long surely needs to be at least updated and changed to suit modern needs. We live in a very different time now.
Tom Fyans:	I think it's more relevant than ever. If you look at the threats of climate change, we need green spaces around our cities more than ever. We need to flood resilient carbon capture. We need farmland that's productive to produce food in the cities. With a growing population, green spaces become more valuable and more environmentally important. So no, I think it's the opposite. It's been a successful policy. I came on the train this morning from London ... if we didn't have the green belt, Faversham would be part of London. The same growth as L.A. has experienced in the last fifty years ... we'd be sitting in London right now. It might have been an easier journey, but it certainly wouldn't have been a more beautiful one.
George Buskell:	Well, you mentioned that we have a growing population, but surely the point is that we do have a growing population. And so we need to build more homes, and we need to do it quickly. I mean, we're living in a time where millions of people can't actually afford homes in their local area. Isn't that an issue?
Tom Fyans:	Yes, we really do need more homes and CPRE really supports the right homes in the right places. The issue isn't land area, it's housing building rates. With this planning permissions for half a million homes that are being sat on, I came through Ebbsfleet in Kent on the train earlier on the train as well. They have built 500 houses in the last nine years on a development there. Nine years it's taken to build 500 houses. That's their planning permission for nine years, for 15 thousand houses. 
	Land is an issue, green belt is not the bogeyman of this crisis. There is a supply problem with housing, but that's because the government has stopped building houses since the war. There's plenty of brownfield land available, that's previously developed land. There's enough land to build at least 1.1 million houses at least in this country. Let's use that first and see where we are then. But developers don't want to use that land, because it's more expensive. green belt nice and cheap, fresh, somebody said earlier, let's just start anew, keep the profit margins high, so prices stay high. That's the real morality tale here.
George Buskell:	But surely the green belt at least contributes to that problem.
Tom Fyans:	No, it doesn't if you look at actually somewhere like Leicester which doesn't have a green belt, and Nottingham that doesn't have a green belt, house prices are exactly the same.
George Buskell:	But if you look at Cambridge, Oxford, and London, the places with you know the most recognisable green belts, and I think possibly the biggest green belts in England? Their housing prices are absolutely soaring. They're ridiculous.
Tom Fyans:	Well yes, but that's not all to do with the green belt. That's to do with the fact that people are now seeing houses as an investment rather than a home, and that is one of the problems. If you look at house prices in those places, they're unaffordable for most people in the country now. That is not to do with the green belt I'm afraid, and the government have recognised recently it's a broken housing market. They've also recognised the sanctity of the green belt and don't think they want to change it.
George Buskell:	So would you accept building on the green belt under certain circumstances?
Tom Fyans:	We already do, actually. When it's affordable housing, they're called Rural Exception Sites, so when there's small developments that a landowner has put forward ... usually the land is free, which makes it a big problem in this country land value. We do support brownfield development in the green belt as long as it doesn't affect the openness too much. We understand that there's an affordable housing crisis, but the types of houses that currently get built in the green belt are generally executive homes. 90% of the homes that we've looked at in the green belt in the moment are not social or affordable housing, so we're kidding ourselves if we think that we're going to build on the green belt and solve the housing crisis.

