Michael Buerk:	George.
George Buskell:	I think we've kind of been focusing on like housing in terms of development a bit too much. Now, lots of people like nature, they love fields, but they also don't like the fact that they have bad broadband connections. They don't like the fact that they have to travel 20 miles to get to a GP. Surely their concerns are important?
Howard Davies:	Absolutely, and in areas of outstanding natural beauty, the planning processes that take place within, or the area planning processes take into account people's concerns around broadband, around access to services. I think anybody managing any form of protected landscape has this central to their thinking. I think it's very different when the market doesn't necessarily support ... so you used broadband as an example. The market doesn't necessarily support the rollout of broadband to these deeply rural areas because, in the same way that housing is an issue, it's not always economically viable to do that. So there needs to be support mechanisms in place to actually deal with some of these issues. But these issues aren't there because these areas are protected, these areas that common across all rural areas, they happen to be protected as well.
George Buskell:	So what about the fact that the countryside's been changing since the industrial revolution, and surely progress is a good thing, and that we should be open-minded and forward-looking as opposed to looking backwards to this sort of 20's view of the countryside where we overly-romanticise it.
Howard Davies:	Yeah, absolutely. I couldn't agree more. The landscape has been changing for millennia, and not just for the last hundred years or so. These landscapes are products of human endeavour. They aren't natural, they're no more natural than anything else. It would be absolutely wrong to look at them as areas of preservation. That's not what they're about. 
	I would like to think that there's a lot of effort at the local level going into innovative housing, innovative design, innovative land management that actually ensures that these landscapes remain very contemporary, actually. They have been changing, they always will change, and actually designing or managing the design of that change is a really important step in their management.
	 The reason a lot of people want to move out to what they see as 'idyllic countryside' is that we don't even get our planning right in the towns and cities, where we should be concentrating most of our effort.

