Michael Buerk:	Toby Lloyd, thanks very much indeed. 
	Our last witness is Howard Davies, who's chief executive of the National Association of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. I suppose the argument is, you'd only have to give up a small amount of green belt to build homes for a rather large number of individuals or families. It's people versus dirt, isn't it?
Howard Davies:	Not really. I think we would only need to give up a small amount of land to accommodate the developments required, full stop. I think the figures that were spoken about earlier, if you look at 11% of England is already developed? In order to accommodate two thousand houses for the next fifteen years, we're only looking at a figure of one percent anyway. So, if we can't find one percent out of the remainder of land that isn't protected in England, I'm not quite sure what we're doing wrong, to be honest.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	My first question is: you argue that human identity is linked to the natural environment. But wouldn't a human-centred approach to nature mean that you put humans first, so you would build new homes for humans and infrastructure for humans above everything else, no ifs, no buts, no "what about the environment"?
Howard Davies:	One of the bits of discussion that hasn't come out so far is the link that we inherently have with the environment: we are part of nature, and nature is part of us. We're distancing ourselves from it, as if it's something we can work on, we can manage, we can embed in our economic systems without actually maintaining the link that it inherently has with us as a species. We're talking about housing and accommodation here, but actually the greatest accommodation we have is our environment. It's just a different level, if we get that wrong, we get it all wrong.
Poppy Cleary:	But everybody has a different view of what the environment means and is to them. Mine is development, houses, parks, leisure centers, businesses, families being able to live in open countryside, and have good standards of living there and trove there. A countryside and environment and nature full of people. I'm sure that's different to yours.
Howard Davies: Everybody does have a different view. But where we do have commonality is an understanding that the benefits that we derive from a healthy, functioning environment supports us per se. Our water is filtered through our environment, our food comes from our environment, our health and well-being is ultimately dependent on the quality of that environment. So we may well differ in certain areas, but actually our fundamental well-being is linked to the sustainable management of our environment.
Poppy Cleary:	Can't you sustain the environment in England and in Britain and in the U.K. but still decide to build houses and develop in areas that don't need to be protected?
Howard Davies:	You could. There are plenty of places in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland I suspect that can be developed perfectly well. The reason these areas are protected is not because there's been some arbitrary decision to protect these areas because they fulfil certain criteria now. They've been protected for a long time. There is a national consensus that the value of some of these areas that require protection is just that: there's a national consensus on their value, hence the importance of protecting them.
Poppy Cleary:	But who decides how they're valuable? Who decides what's worth protecting and what's not worth protecting?
Howard Davies:	That's a very good question. I think our planning policies allow fulfilling engagement in the development of local plans and programs. There is also a national element. A lot of these areas were designated - this is not just green belt, this is areas of outstanding natural beauty and the national parks - were designated, or at least the process for setting their designation came apart shortly after the Second World War, when there was a real re-evaluation of what actually was important, and how we were actually going to look after those areas that we consider to be important in the nation's interest, not just for local interest.

