Michael Buerk:	Jane.
Jane Fidge:	Okay, for you ... is it a case of the collective good versus the individual good that's the problem here?
Toby Lloyd:	Yes, it is certainly a tension right at the heart of all planning decisions, and at the heart of property itself. By owning any property, you are inherently engaged in a tension between the rights of the individual and the surrounding community. The very debate we are having here is about the fact that some people may own bits of land, and may want to do things like develop it or farm it, and other people may have justifiable interest in that land ... heter as provision of recreation space or just a good view, or the value of nature. So yes, it is about that tension.
Jane Fidge:	But don't you think that maybe sort of small villages, communities, towns, families ... do they not count as their own collective? Do they not have their own collective good, to not think of their opinion ... because often, small villages will want to maintain their green belt, their area, their sort of beauty of their area. Do you not think that we should value their opinion?
Toby Lloyd:	Absolutely. And one of the problems with our development system is that it does not work anywhere closely enough or effectively enough with local communities. We do a lot of work with people who resist development, and they will tell you overwhelmingly that it's not the principle of houses being built that the oppose ... actually, lots of villages are worried that their villages are dying. Their schools are closing, their shops can't stay open, because they don't have the population. What they don't want is ugly, unsustainable, overpriced, badly supported housing being plunked onto their villages knowing that no one who lives there will be able to afford those homes. What they do want is genuinely sustainable, good-quality affordable housing, so that local people can afford to continue on living there.
Jane Fidge:	But there must be people out there that just want to maintain the green belt for natural value, not just because they want, you know, sustainable housing. Because they actually want to maintain the environment.
Toby Lloyd:	There are some, and there are also people who will resist any development at all. Mostly, those are people who are extremely well-housed themselves. The people who never get a say in these debates are people who are not well-housed, who have no hope of being able to rent or buy a decent place themselves.
Jane Fidge:	So, does that sort of mean that poorer people who then can't access this kind of housing, do they not really care about nature? Would they rather just, you know ... "let's just build on the green belt, I need houses, get rid of nature".
Toby Lloyd:	No, but this is just illustrative of how there are always tensions between different interests in society, and I don't see why we should always prejudice the interests of well-heeled, affluent, usually older homeowners over the interests of everyone else.

