Michael Buerk:	Right. To tonight's subject. For my generation, home ownership has been a one-way ticket to prosperity. Some have made more from their houses than from a lifetime of work. For the generation that form our audience here at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, it will likely be an increasingly impossible dream. 
	House prices have tripled in the last 20 years. If general inflation had increased since 1971 at the same rate as house prices, a chicken would cost £51. There are many reasons for this, but the most important one is the shortage of building land. Small island, crowded at this end, tight building regulations, and the green belt - preserved with the best of intentions to stop urban sprawl, protect our beautiful countryside. But shortage of building land means fewer homes get built. Short supply, increasing demand, higher prices.
	70% of the cost of a new home is in the land it stands on. It was less than 25% when I was your age. No wonder there's a growing clamour to unlock the green belt. No wonder there is such vested interest to protect it.
	The moral argument is much deeper and more complicated than drawing a line between environmental protection and selfish NIMBYism. Does our physical landscape have a moral value beyond what use it can be put to by humans? What about intergenerational justice? Do we have an absolute moral obligation to provide for the next generation, whatever the consequences? And provide what, by the way? Adequate shelter may be a basic human right, but is home ownership? Arguably, more successful countries, like Switzerland and Germany, prefer to rent. Is home ownership a moral good at all, or merely the symbol of a society whose only moral is materialism?
	That's our Moral Maze tonight, and our student panel - Poppy Cleary, who wants to become a barrister; Jane Fidge, who wants to study politics; as does Maddie Groeger-Wilson, who wants to do politics and international relations, and George Buskell, who also wants to study politics. No shortage of future politicians. Now, where do you stand on all of this? Poppy Cleary, are you a NIMBY or a vandal?
Poppy Cleary:	I'm on the vandal side. I think the joining of nature and people is not fundamental to my identity, and I don't think that it's fair for me to be restricted in such a way that the green belt proposes. I want the freedom to be able to build a house near a city that I want to live and work in.
Michael Buerk:	Jane Finch.
Jane Fidge:	I strongly believe that we have a responsibility to preserve nature, and a responsibility to ourselves to finding nature, and if that makes me a NIMBY, than so be it.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie Groeger-Wilson?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I don't think I'm either, really? I believe that nature is valuable in and of itself, and I think it's time that we start realising that it's moral worth is not defined by what we as humans can fund with it, it's value's intrinsic, and not instrumental.
Michael Buerk:	George. George Buskell.
George Buskell:	I'd describe myself as a vandal, I'd like to think I'm a nice vandal. I don't think that the homes of normal, average working people should be compromised, nor their ability to buy a home should be compromised by the existence of some pretty useless grass.

