Michael Buerk:	But Jane, do you not think that Toby had a point when he said that "if you're looking at it from an environmental perspective, here are people who are having to commute across the green belt" with its own inherent environmental problems?
Jane Fidge:	Obviously there's an issue with people having to commute to work. But I think that really, is the slight annoyance of having to get on a train to go to where you work or to go wherever, compared to sort of preserving nature? And to me that sounds like a much bigger sort of pro. To me, that's just ... that doesn't even ask a question. THat's just nature and someone having to be on a train for an extra 20 minutes. What do we value more?
Poppy Cleary:	You can still preserve nature [crosstalk 00:42:17] whilst accepting that cities can expand a bit.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	You can still preserve vast areas of nature in nature whilst accepting that you don't want a two hour commute into the city where your job is.
Jane Fidge:	Where would you ...
Michael Buerk:	Go on, Jane.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well ... oh, sorry.
Michael Buerk:	Oh sorry, go on Jane. Jane first, then Maddie.
Jane Fidge:	Where would you stop with this development, 'cos there's gonna be people everywhere. So how - where are you going to stop this development to sort of make it easier for everyone to get to work?
Poppy Cleary:	While still having [crosstalk 00:42:43] development in society.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	Like was point upon earlier by some of the witnesses. You can create new cities. You could completely re-imagine the environment and the landscape in which we live in, there hasn't been a new major city in years and years and years. We can completely restructure the way that we live in.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I think you'll find [crosstalk 00:43:02] that if you end up doing that ...
Michael Buerk:	Maddie?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	... most people would ask to put a green belt around that as well.
Michael Buerk:	But Maddie, wouldn't you accept the argument put forward by the one side of the argument by two of our witnesses that in this debate, it is the well-housed, it is the affluent, dare I say it is the more elderly who have the say ... the homeless and the young don't have much of a say in this argument. Do you not think that's institutionally unfair?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	No, I mean, I take your point, if I'm allowed to say that on the Moral Maze.
Michael Buerk:	You can, to me.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	But honestly, I think everyone should have a say, irrespective of whether they are housed or not housed. Everyone's opinion on this is valid, and I don't own my own home and I am a member of the young generation, and I personally place more value on nature on the moment than ripping up plans for the green belt and expanding outward.
George Buskell:	Is it ...
Michael Buerk:	George.
George Buskell:	Is it morally justifiable that one group in society directly benefits and makes a huge amount of money off the fact that some people can't afford to buy their own homes?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I mean, then that's surely an issue with the property market, rather than actual protection for nature.

