Michael Buerk:	Second witness, Tom Fyans. George ... I mean all our witnesses had powerful arguments and well-organised arguments ... Tom Fyans' argument was centred on that there's a moral value to landscape, above and beyond human utility. Is that something you would take issue with?
George Buskell:	Yeah, I mean we would have to place moral importance on elements of landscape. People obviously get a lot of enjoyment out of countryside. The issue is when there are genuine human needs, like development and infrastructure, they need to be taken into account first.
Michael Buerk:	The argument I suppose that would resonate with a lot of people that Tom Fyans made was that actually green belt was made as attractive to developers because it's cheap to build on, not because it's the only place where you can build homes.
George Buskell:	If it is truly the case that developers only want to build on the green belt because it's cheap and because they want to increase their profit margins, that's obviously a problem and we should look to other places. But if it turns out to be the easiest and simplest solution to the problem, the problem at hand is big, and it's getting worse. And so, perhaps we may have to look at the cheapest and easiest solution.
Michael Buerk:	And Jane, his argument that, you know, if it wasn't for the green belt that Faversham would be on the outer ends of L.A., is that ... actually, that sounds rather attractive, come to think of it. But no, no, no. No.
Jane Fidge:	No, I think that's a very powerful point. Because I think that, really, when you go on the train from Faversham and you go up to London ... when you're sitting in that train, you don't really appreciate what you're going past. But this is miles and miles and miles of greenfield, but we would surely notice that, if that was all buildings. We would look out the window, and this sounds such a stupid point, but it would make train journeys so boring, if all you ever see out the window is the same thing over and over.
Michael Buerk:	And Poppy, somebody said "what's wrong with urban sprawl?" What is wrong with urban sprawl?
Poppy Cleary:	I don't think there is anything wrong with urban sprawl. Like one of the witnesses outlined, if we didn't have the green belt than Faversham would be part of London, and that's great. I'd love that. I think that would be beneficial to people. I think that city growth and the growth of areas where people want to live is important, and it's a benefit to humanity. 
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	The key to this argument and the key to moving forward is development within the cities, which is actually what people want. When people want to live in a city, they want to live in an urban area, they want to be close to things, they want to be close to facilities ... and I'm afraid I disagree with Poppy in the fact that yes, you want to live in a city, but there are many, many, many other people that want to live in the countryside.
Poppy Cleary:	But there's a limit [crosstalk 00:39:39] to how many people that cities can accommodate until you have no choice but to expand upon them.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy?
Poppy Cleary:	Whereas if you are so inclined with the view that you want to live in the countryside and you want to have acres of field around you, then there's more options for that sort of person than there are for a person who wants to live in a city.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	But the thing is, when you expand [crosstalk 00:40:00] outward the cities, you don't end up with people living in cities, you end up with people living in suburbia.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	[crosstalk 00:40:05] That's the difference.
Poppy Cleary:	No, you ... well, cities have grown considerably since they were first established. London has grown, and it can continue to grow.

