Michael Buerk:	Poppy, Poppy Cleary?
Poppy Cleary:	Yes, my first question to you is: the green belt was created in 1955, as George already outlined, we live in a very different society. But the green belt isn't necessarily a thing ... it's manmade, it's created by humans. Who's to say we can't tear it up and remake a different policy better-suited to our needs?
Tom Fyans:	Well, you can and that's what developers are arguing all the time. The only people, as I say who actually argue for development on the green belt are developers, who actually want to increase their profit margins. Common sense says you don't want to pay for the countryside next door to where most of your urban population live, but developers do want to tear it up, because it's a constraint. It's been a very successful constraint.
Poppy Cleary:	If it's a constraint, shouldn't we take away the constraint that should stop affordable houses being built in the right places? It's not just about creating the homes for people who want them, but they need to be in the right area.
Tom Fyans:	I would love that to be the right case in some ways, but we don't have a housing market that's delivering affordable homes. But back to the land issue, developers want the green belt because it's cheap. They're not bothered by the environmental benefits that we have as users when we use it.
Poppy Cleary:	But if the green belt is cheap, than certainly by opening up the entire area, you're gonna create the idea and the ability to create affordable homes in that area.
Tom Fyans:	If we had a house building sector that could build houses ... we've built less than 200 thousand homes a year consistently for the last 10, 20 years. We're just not building the houses. There's a constraint in supply, often intentionally by some of the developers, there's a skill shortage and there's a material shortage. There is just not the model at the moment. Councils are not allowed to borrow money to build social or affordable housing. We've got a problem, I'm not disputing we've got a serious affordability problem, but it's not really the green belt is often the easy bogeyman, and it's just not true.
Poppy Cleary:	Do you not think that if you opened up the green belt area that is so valuable to many people, that the housing market would adapt itself to enable affordable houses to be built in the areas that people want to live in?
Tom Fyans:	I don't think so. I think when you get planning permission on a piece of land, it goes up in value about 300 times. That's a land market problem that we've got, that's an economic problem. Communities don't benefit from that. The landowner does, and then the developer does by then building unaffordable houses. Community don't benefit at all, which is why you don't get that support for that type of housing in communities across the country at the moment.
Michael Buerk:	Tom Fyans, thank you very much indeed.
Tom Fyans:	Thank you.

