Michael Buerk:	Our last witness, Howard Davies. It got to an interesting binary issue - I can't remember who raised it with him - about whether the social was more important than the natural. Is that not what it boils down to, Poppy, do you think? It's human utility, it's ... human beings are much more important than any old tree is, as somebody mentioned.
Poppy Cleary:	I would agree with that statement. I think human beings are more important than the tree. Obviously, we need some sort of greenery and environment in order to have a remotely sustainable being, but I don't think that nature holds any sort of moral superiority to humans. I think humans are dominant over nature, and I think it should continue that way. I don't think there should be areas that exempt from that.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I think you'll [crosstalk 00:45:01] that humans are in fact part of nature.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I don't think we can separate ourselves out. I mean, as much as we like to think we can dominate it and that we're somehow masters of the natural realm, I'm afraid it was here long before us, it'll be here long after we're gone and ... it was picked on a little bit in the debate, but I don't think we really put as much emphasis as we should on our connection with nature. Looking into - this is going to sound rather stupid, but looking into development for new hospital blocks, for example ... there has been a lot of emphasis on making sure people that are lying in their beds can look out their window and see a garden. Or look out and see some greenery, and have that connection with the natural world that we have so long been taught to ignore as people. Which is just wrong.
Poppy Cleary:	But that's a connection that you have [crosstalk 00:45:53] to the natural world, that's not a connection that I have to the natural world.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	I don't think that is part of my identity. I can understand that I'm part of an ecosystem and that I utilise as a human parts of the environment, but I don't think that people's value of nature should equate to a law or equate to regulations that stop me developing.

