Michael Buerk:	Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I would kind of like to jump on your feeling of responsibility to my generation, really. I think that's all well and good, but don't we surely have a responsibility to the generations that come after me? Don't we have a responsibility to preserve nature for them?
Shiv Malik:	Yes.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So with your kind of new emphasis on development, are you kind of okay with letting loose on the greenfield cites, and maybe, possibly leaving my children, my grandchildren with a world of concrete?
Shiv Malik:	Okay, so ... we have this, as human beings we have wonderful sets of systematic biases in how we see the world. So most of us travel from one built-up area to another. And so we think, in England, that most of it's built up. Now if I asked most people what percentage of England - just England, not Scotland or Wales - just England, because that tends to be the place that people focus on as most built-up. What percentage is actually built-up? The answer might be 20% or 50%, but it actually turns out to be 11%. But it's actually less than that, because that includes all the parks, and all the gardens, and all the rivers and canals, and it turns out that actually three percent is concreted over.
	Now, can we extend that by a percent? Absolutely. What are we giving up for that? Well, we have to ask ourselves that question, sure. But if that also means that the lives of not just our generation of people under thirty-five, but every other corresponding generation after this is going to be much lower than even their parents ... then that's a terrible incitement of both us as a society, but also what are we doing for nature in that regard? If we're going to be a sort of declining society, we aren't going to be able to fix the sort of problems, the environmental problems that we need to do.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	See, that kind of brings me on to my next point. I mean, you yourself say that now we know more than ever about kind of the environmental situations that we ourselves are creating. Surely there's an argument for saying that my generation should be the first generation to say "you know what? I'm going to settle for less. I'm going to appreciate the damage that development has done to our kind of environment". Surely we should be the ones to take that moral stand.
Shiv Malik:	That argument leads you in two directions. One is, look, we should not just settle for less, but we basically go back to being purely environmental being. In which case, go! Great! Be a hunter-gatherer, right? Cos that's the least environmentally-destructive position that you can take. I don't want that. So we've got to find a middle ground.
	The other solution is to say "well look, hang on. Our currently - our cities in this country certainly are incredibly environmentally destructive. Just take traffic, for example. It creates a whole load of Co2 because cars can't get from one place to another, cos they're congested. That's just one little small thing. Imagine a city in which there wasn't not just traffic, but also you could build homes and houses and entire buildings and streets built with solar panels ... suddenly you start to re-imagine your environment, and working harmoniously with it, rather than living in basically Victorian cities, which weren't designed to live and breathe environmentally, if you want.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Surely that's not good for development within the cities, rather than expanding outwards, to restrict kind of the damage that urban areas do.
Shiv Malik:	Well, the problem with that is that people already own that land. So I'm less willing to evict those people at very high cost, then we're gonna be stuck.
Michael Buerk:	Shiv Malik, thank you very much indeed.
Shiv Malik:	Thank you.

