Michael Buerk:	Howard Davies, thank you very much indeed. 
	So, student panel, what do you think of what you heard? Jane. Shiv Malik, our first witness, I think he said that his generation, or the younger generation were serfs. Do you feel a trainee serf?
Jane Fidge:	Well, I'm gonna be honest. I don't agree with you, and I'm part of the younger generation. I'm not so obsessed with having a house that I want to build on the green belt, so I think that you've overlooked that a little, and you've overlooked the fact that young people aren't all obsessed with having a house.
Michael Buerk:	And Maddie, was it you that said "perhaps we ought to settle for less", are you the sort of person who would settle for less?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well, I mean when it comes down to it, I - don't shake your head, Poppy. When it comes down to it, I think my generation are the ones who have been educated the most about this topic. And I think it really comes out when you have arguments like this. And even in this room today, all of the talk of development has been about environmentally friendly development, and it shows a lot about the values in this very room, and about how much nature means to every single one of us. We can completely see how much nature means to us just by this conversation.
Michael Buerk:	And if the end result is ... I don't know, I mean ... maybe your own family own their own home, but you won't own your own home. You won't feel unfairly cheated or generationally abused?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well, my mother rents and my father owns, so I can see both sides of it. But I think we all accept the realities of what we have to live with, and we'll all deal with it. I don't think either way my quality of life is going to dramatically drop down the drain. I think I'll be fine, thanks.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy, you were shaking your head. Will you be fine?
Poppy Cleary:	I disagree, I-
Michael Buerk:	Or resentful?
Poppy Cleary:	I place a great importance on the prospect of owning a home in a city that I want to work in and that I want to live in for a lengthy period of time. I disagree with Jane's point that the young generation don't care about owning a home, because owning a home and having that security in your life is of great importance to me. With such an arbitrary piece of policy such as green belt land, it's not fair - especially on younger generations - but it's not fair on anybody that wants to live in an area that's heavily populated or very popular. I don't see the problem with urban sprawl.

