Michael Buerk:	Our next witness is Toby Lloyd, who's head of housing development at Shelter, and co-author of a new book, Rethinking the Economics of Land and Housing, which places it squarely in today's issue. Toby Lloyd, is your basic position that "all property is theft", but home ownership is particularly pernicious and damaging to society?
Toby Lloyd:	No, absolutely not. That quote we use from Proudhon we use in the book, really, to expose the contradictions and tensions at the heart of the housing system, which are in fact at the heart of the liberal concept of private property and land. Proudhon also said that "property is liberty", and our conjecture is that he was right on both counts. Property is both things.
Michael Buerk:	Okay, Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Right. I want to pull it a little bit back to nature, rather than buildings. So, nature's value ... is it intrinsic, or is it instrumental?
Toby Lloyd:	Well firstly, if we're talking about green belt, as we've already heard that doesn't actually already have anything to do with the intrinsic value of nature. It is a planning policy for the containment of urban areas. And in fact, I suspect the debate would have been very different if all this time, instead of being called "green belt" it had been called "urban containment zones", or something kind of technical as most planning policies are ... we'd probably be having a very different conversation. 
	Unfortunately, this debate gets tied up with the debate around the intrinsic value of nature, which actually green belts have nothing to do with. There are bits of green belt land which are in the inner city, I know of one which is a derelict petrol station next to a tube station and a main road, but technically it is green belt land and an affordable housing provider cannot build affordable housing there, because that is green belt.
	Equally, there are huge amounts of green belts surrounding our cities, which are actually of extremely low environmental value, often because they [inaudible 00:24:46] desert for very very low biodiversity, far lower biodiversity than the urban areas in the inner city often are ... and also things like golf courses. You know, we use more land in England for golf than we do for homes. So when people say "we cannot afford the space to provide the homes we need", it is simply nonsense.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, what do you need nature to be to justify it's worth? How does it need to justify it's worth?
Toby Lloyd:	I don't think nature needs to justify it's worth at all. It is, as you said, intrinsic. The question here is how do we as a society regulate the amount of space that we use for homes, versus other uses?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Okay, but I mean development as we've seen it so far, all it's gone to do really is line the pockets of the developers themselves. How are we ensuring that the benefits of development are actually going to go to the people that need it?
Toby Lloyd:	I agree that we have a fundamental problem with the nature of our development industry in this country, which is far too predicated on delivering the highest possible returns, first to the landowners and second to developers, with the community and the people who actually need homes - including the quarter of a million people who are homeless in this country - are very, very distant third in that pecking order. So yes, I agree that the development sector needs urgent reform to provide the homes that we actually need, not just profits.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, I would like to bring you back onto this kind of point about our obligation to nature now that we know more. How do we know that we don't continue doing the damage that we have so far?
Toby Lloyd:	Firstly, the planning system, I think, does have strong tools for protection nature. Things like national parks, areas of outstanding national beauty ... these are all outstanding policies for protecting the really really valuable bits of nature ... I just don't think that the green belt per say is a particularly effective way of protecting nature. And in many ways, it's quite damaging. Millions of people commute every day across the greenbelt, twice. That is adding hugely to the carbon impact on ... of the economy, because they cannot live close to where the jobs are, because green belt policies insist that we build homes off and on greenfield sites beyond the green belt, and then demand that people commute thirty miles into town to work. That cannot be an environmentally sustainable or sensible position.

