Michael Buerk: Student panel, thanks very much indeed. Our first witness is Shiv Malik, he is a journalist who writes on political issues affecting young people in particular. He co-wrote the book Jilted Generation: How Britain Bankrupted its Youth.
 You reckon - as I understand it - the shortage of building land is wrecking the lives of our younger generation. You lot are having a dreadful time, and it's my fault.
Shiv Malik: We've really suffered in this country, I think, from a lack of imagination. And also we've looked upon sort of the next generation as people who can basically be serfs, live in a lack of housing stock and basically pay rent to the point where they can't really enjoy their lives, where they can't even raise families. And all of this sort of centers on us not building for the last thirty to forty years. And the result is this, which is a generation worse off than their parents.
Michael Buerk: Jane, your witness.
Jane Fidge: Is it the principal of the green belt, or the way the policy's been applied that you'd say you object to?
Shiv Malik: I think the ... it really comes down to the policy. In the sense, if you don't build - not just homes, and we're not just talking about homes, we're talking about the infrastructure of the cities that we need to as a country both expand and absorb our growing population. If you don't do any of that, then yes, you have a problem with the policy, which is that the green belt is there to restrict already existing cities.
 The policy itself can be useful in saying "look, we don't want urban sprawl", but at the same time if you don't do anything else, then you're stuffing the next generation.
Jane Fidge: So would you say that nature just doesn't really have any value to you whatsoever?
Shiv Malik: No, of course nature has value. Again, you've got to ask yourself "what is this green belt that we're talking about"? And the answer is, if you actually go and do a tour of the green belt, you'll find that most of it's sort of almost regarded as [00:11:40] brownfield site in many regards. A lot of it's just, as one of the panelists has said, just sort of useless grass. So it doesn't actually do much, and it's in and around cities that already have existing infrastructure. THat's great. At the same time, we're not talking about, you know, building over the lake district here.
Jane Fidge: Does it have to do something or be staggeringly beautiful like the lake district to actually be preserved?
Shiv Malik: No, but really, this is about balancing what we want in life. Do we want people to have, to enjoy their lives, and therefore not spending their working lives paying for their mortgage or paying for rent? Because then they can go out and enjoy their lives, and actually the economy as a whole grows properly. They're able to raise children and have children. Imagine weighing that against a field that we say "well look, we've siphoned this out, and forevermore no one should ever build on it". And if we look outside of the window here in Faversham, we can see all of this was once woodland if you want, but we've as human beings worked with nature ... in some senses we've got that horribly wrong. But now we know more than ever about what we can do that's right, environmentally speaking. So let's put that into practice, and let's build!
Jane Fidge: Well, with 25 million empty bedrooms in the U.K. and lots of brownfield sites available, why are you so fixated on the green belt? Are there not other options that we should explore first?
Shiv Malik: Well, the green belt is the easiest thing to do.
Jane Fidge: Just cos it's the easiest, should we take that one?
Shiv Malik: No. No, we shouldn't. But it is the easiest thing to do. And in the midst of a crisis, right - which is where we are at the moment - then that might be the way out. Now, I'm not suggesting that we simply build over the green belt, but actually as we mentioned before, it sounds nice, it's green, but actually turns out to be a lot of brownfield site, too. And we're subsidising most of this, too, through farming subsidies and the like.

