Michael Buerk:	Okay. So let's now turn to our established panel. Affluent, well-heeled, old golf club member, Claire Fox. How's your chipping these days?
Claire Fox:	But look. An interesting example of the dilemma we've got is that one of the panel made the point of, you know, when you're in your hospital bed, nature is valuable for humans because you look out and see, you know ...
Michael Buerk:	That was Maddie, I think.
Claire Fox:	Yes, Maddie. That ... great point. And that's a wonderful way to think of nature. And then I think ... but what I would say is, I want to be able to build the hospital. I want to be able to create antibiotics, and to be honest with you, I want a cure that's beyond looking out the window at the field. The field is a nice thing that we as humans might add, but it's very low down the pecking order of, in my sense, a sense of priorities.
	So I suppose that what I wanted to get over today is not that I despise the beauty of nature, although we've established that just 'cos the green belt's called "green" it's not necessarily beautiful greenery, but it's also the case that I think we are above and beyond nature. Nature is now at our service, and that's it's great beauty.
Michael Buerk:	Matthew?
Matthew Taylor:	And one of the things about human being should be our capacity for imagination. And what I found very disappointing in the arguments that we heard from Shiv Malik and Tobey Lloyd was a kind of lack of imagination. You know, they're ... we could massively increase the density of our cities. You know, as Jane said, there are 25 million empty bedrooms in our cities. We can have land taxes. There are all sorts of ways we could accommodate more people in better cities without having to damage nature. And you know ... and yet ... why is nature the victim of the human failure of our planning policy? Why don't we have human solutions to human problems, rather than saying "Well because we can't resolve this, because we can't resolve inequality, because we can't make developers more imaginative ... well, it's the green belt that has to suffer for our failure".
Michael Buerk:	Anne McElvoy has the answer to that question.
Anne McElvoy:	Well, I thought it was an interesting example of where there was a conflation, really, between what the green belt was - is it symbolic, or is it really a thing in itself? And I thought what we had tonight was an argument which we started out talking about whether the green belt was full of golf courses or this marvellous bit of nature that Goethe would have celebrated, had he been around now. 
	And actually we ended up with it being very functional and, for Jane it was about having something nice to look at on the train from London, she thought that a train journey might be a bit boring if we didn't have it. And I thought "Oh, well get something more sensational to read on the train". But it was an interesting example, it was different things to different people. That would suggest, to me, that the witnesses who were suggesting that you couldn't really touch it otherwise something dreadful would happen actually disagreed on what the something dreadful was.
Michael Buerk:	Giles.
Giles Fraser:	Anne's talking rubbish. And the reason's she's talking rubbish ... and Poppy was talking rubbish too. And the reason [crosstalk 00:50:48] that she was talking rubbish, too is because nature is not something 'out there' that you either like or you don't like.
Michael Buerk:	It's a technical term.
Giles Fraser:	And I thought that Jane made this point very well, and Maddie. Nature is us. It is who we are. We are as much a part of it as it is 'out there'. It's what we breathe, it's what we eat, so somehow the idea of being 'against nature' or 'for human beings' is a false distinction. Nature is us, and protecting nature is protecting us.
Matthew Taylor:	And I have to say, but can I just say ... Poppy, I don't want to put you on the spot, but I find your vision of the future terrifying. I mean, it feels like the whole world is a Naughty Story carpark. You know, I ...
Claire Fox:	But I think that, first of all: we are not nature. We are natural, but we overcome natural limits. That's why we're sitting in with electricity, with all the gains of modernity. And human consciousness and social ... our capacity to socialise and reflect and have a morality is what makes us distinct. If we were natural, we would just be. You know, nature's pretty grim. It's a fight, and it's savage, you want to overcome it.
Matthew Taylor:	Oh god.
Anne McElvoy:	Claire's having none of it!
Claire Fox:	I'm having none of that, but I also think it's at the moral heart of this [crosstalk 00:52:00] and I think that actually George and Poppy were impressing ...
Matthew Taylor:	So have we done nothing wrong? Okay, have we done nothing wrong, and is there nothing that human being have done in their dominion over nature that worries you? Is it all progress? Is everything progress? Is there nothing that's you'd like to go back and change? [crosstalk 00:52:11] The dodo?
Claire Fox:	I ... very good, very good. We're talking about what we morally aspire to. And your caricature of Poppy's point about development meaning a carpark is just cheap, right? It's called moving things forward and not getting stuck in the past.

