Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, what do you need nature to be to justify it's worth? How does it need to justify it's worth?
Toby Lloyd:	I don't think nature needs to justify it's worth at all. It is, as you said, intrinsic. The question here is how do we as a society regulate the amount of space that we use for homes, versus other uses?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Okay, but I mean development as we've seen it so far, all it's gone to do really is line the pockets of the developers themselves. How are we ensuring that the benefits of development are actually going to go to the people that need it?
Toby Lloyd:	I agree that we have a fundamental problem with the nature of our development industry in this country, which is far too predicated on delivering the highest possible returns, first to the landowners and second to developers, with the community and the people who actually need homes - including the quarter of a million people who are homeless in this country - are very, very distant third in that pecking order. So yes, I agree that the development sector needs urgent reform to provide the homes that we actually need, not just profits.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, I would like to bring you back onto this kind of point about our obligation to nature now that we know more. How do we know that we don't continue doing the damage that we have so far?
Toby Lloyd:	Firstly, the planning system, I think, does have strong tools for protection nature. Things like national parks, areas of outstanding national beauty ... these are all outstanding policies for protecting the really really valuable bits of nature ... I just don't think that the green belt per say is a particularly effective way of protecting nature. And in many ways, it's quite damaging. Millions of people commute every day across the greenbelt, twice. That is adding hugely to the carbon impact on ... of the economy, because they cannot live close to where the jobs are, because green belt policies insist that we build homes off and on greenfield sites beyond the green belt, and then demand that people commute thirty miles into town to work. That cannot be an environmentally sustainable or sensible position.
