Michael Buerk:	Right. To tonight's subject. For my generation, home ownership has been a one-way ticket to prosperity. Some have made more from their houses than from a lifetime of work. For the generation that form our audience here at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, it will likely be an increasingly impossible dream. 
	House prices have tripled in the last 20 years. If general inflation had increased since 1971 at the same rate as house prices, a chicken would cost £51. There are many reasons for this, but the most important one is the shortage of building land. Small island, crowded at this end, tight building regulations, and the green belt - preserved with the best of intentions to stop urban sprawl, protect our beautiful countryside. But shortage of building land means fewer homes get built. Short supply, increasing demand, higher prices.
	70% of the cost of a new home is in the land it stands on. It was less than 25% when I was your age. No wonder there's a growing clamour to unlock the green belt. No wonder there is such vested interest to protect it.
	The moral argument is much deeper and more complicated than drawing a line between environmental protection and selfish NIMBYism. Does our physical landscape have a moral value beyond what use it can be put to by humans? What about intergenerational justice? Do we have an absolute moral obligation to provide for the next generation, whatever the consequences? And provide what, by the way? Adequate shelter may be a basic human right, but is home ownership? Arguably, more successful countries, like Switzerland and Germany, prefer to rent. Is home ownership a moral good at all, or merely the symbol of a society whose only moral is materialism?
	That's our Moral Maze tonight, and our student panel - Poppy Cleary, who wants to become a barrister; Jane Fidge, who wants to study politics; as does Maddie Groeger-Wilson, who wants to do politics and international relations, and George Buskell, who also wants to study politics. No shortage of future politicians. Now, where do you stand on all of this? Poppy Cleary, are you a NIMBY or a vandal?
Poppy Cleary:	I'm on the vandal side. I think the joining of nature and people is not fundamental to my identity, and I don't think that it's fair for me to be restricted in such a way that the green belt proposes. I want the freedom to be able to build a house near a city that I want to live and work in.
Michael Buerk:	Jane Finch.
Jane Fidge:	I strongly believe that we have a responsibility to preserve nature, and a responsibility to ourselves to finding nature, and if that makes me a NIMBY, than so be it.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie Groeger-Wilson?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I don't think I'm either, really? I believe that nature is valuable in and of itself, and I think it's time that we start realising that it's moral worth is not defined by what we as humans can fund with it, it's value's intrinsic, and not instrumental.
Michael Buerk:	George. George Buskell.
George Buskell:	I'd describe myself as a vandal, I'd like to think I'm a nice vandal. I don't think that the homes of normal, average working people should be compromised, nor their ability to buy a home should be compromised by the existence of some pretty useless grass.

Michael Buerk: Student panel, thanks very much indeed. Our first witness is Shiv Malik, he is a journalist who writes on political issues affecting young people in particular. He co-wrote the book Jilted Generation: How Britain Bankrupted its Youth.
 You reckon - as I understand it - the shortage of building land is wrecking the lives of our younger generation. You lot are having a dreadful time, and it's my fault.
Shiv Malik: We've really suffered in this country, I think, from a lack of imagination. And also we've looked upon sort of the next generation as people who can basically be serfs, live in a lack of housing stock and basically pay rent to the point where they can't really enjoy their lives, where they can't even raise families. And all of this sort of centers on us not building for the last thirty to forty years. And the result is this, which is a generation worse off than their parents.
Michael Buerk: Jane, your witness.
Jane Fidge: Is it the principal of the green belt, or the way the policy's been applied that you'd say you object to?
Shiv Malik: I think the ... it really comes down to the policy. In the sense, if you don't build - not just homes, and we're not just talking about homes, we're talking about the infrastructure of the cities that we need to as a country both expand and absorb our growing population. If you don't do any of that, then yes, you have a problem with the policy, which is that the green belt is there to restrict already existing cities.
 The policy itself can be useful in saying "look, we don't want urban sprawl", but at the same time if you don't do anything else, then you're stuffing the next generation.
Jane Fidge: So would you say that nature just doesn't really have any value to you whatsoever?
Shiv Malik: No, of course nature has value. Again, you've got to ask yourself "what is this green belt that we're talking about"? And the answer is, if you actually go and do a tour of the green belt, you'll find that most of it's sort of almost regarded as [00:11:40] brownfield site in many regards. A lot of it's just, as one of the panelists has said, just sort of useless grass. So it doesn't actually do much, and it's in and around cities that already have existing infrastructure. THat's great. At the same time, we're not talking about, you know, building over the lake district here.
Jane Fidge: Does it have to do something or be staggeringly beautiful like the lake district to actually be preserved?
Shiv Malik: No, but really, this is about balancing what we want in life. Do we want people to have, to enjoy their lives, and therefore not spending their working lives paying for their mortgage or paying for rent? Because then they can go out and enjoy their lives, and actually the economy as a whole grows properly. They're able to raise children and have children. Imagine weighing that against a field that we say "well look, we've siphoned this out, and forevermore no one should ever build on it". And if we look outside of the window here in Faversham, we can see all of this was once woodland if you want, but we've as human beings worked with nature ... in some senses we've got that horribly wrong. But now we know more than ever about what we can do that's right, environmentally speaking. So let's put that into practice, and let's build!
Jane Fidge: Well, with 25 million empty bedrooms in the U.K. and lots of brownfield sites available, why are you so fixated on the green belt? Are there not other options that we should explore first?
Shiv Malik: Well, the green belt is the easiest thing to do.
Jane Fidge: Just cos it's the easiest, should we take that one?
Shiv Malik: No. No, we shouldn't. But it is the easiest thing to do. And in the midst of a crisis, right - which is where we are at the moment - then that might be the way out. Now, I'm not suggesting that we simply build over the green belt, but actually as we mentioned before, it sounds nice, it's green, but actually turns out to be a lot of brownfield site, too. And we're subsidising most of this, too, through farming subsidies and the like.

Michael Buerk:	Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I would kind of like to jump on your feeling of responsibility to my generation, really. I think that's all well and good, but don't we surely have a responsibility to the generations that come after me? Don't we have a responsibility to preserve nature for them?
Shiv Malik:	Yes.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So with your kind of new emphasis on development, are you kind of okay with letting loose on the greenfield cites, and maybe, possibly leaving my children, my grandchildren with a world of concrete?
Shiv Malik:	Okay, so ... we have this, as human beings we have wonderful sets of systematic biases in how we see the world. So most of us travel from one built-up area to another. And so we think, in England, that most of it's built up. Now if I asked most people what percentage of England - just England, not Scotland or Wales - just England, because that tends to be the place that people focus on as most built-up. What percentage is actually built-up? The answer might be 20% or 50%, but it actually turns out to be 11%. But it's actually less than that, because that includes all the parks, and all the gardens, and all the rivers and canals, and it turns out that actually three percent is concreted over.
	Now, can we extend that by a percent? Absolutely. What are we giving up for that? Well, we have to ask ourselves that question, sure. But if that also means that the lives of not just our generation of people under thirty-five, but every other corresponding generation after this is going to be much lower than even their parents ... then that's a terrible incitement of both us as a society, but also what are we doing for nature in that regard? If we're going to be a sort of declining society, we aren't going to be able to fix the sort of problems, the environmental problems that we need to do.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	See, that kind of brings me on to my next point. I mean, you yourself say that now we know more than ever about kind of the environmental situations that we ourselves are creating. Surely there's an argument for saying that my generation should be the first generation to say "you know what? I'm going to settle for less. I'm going to appreciate the damage that development has done to our kind of environment". Surely we should be the ones to take that moral stand.
Shiv Malik:	That argument leads you in two directions. One is, look, we should not just settle for less, but we basically go back to being purely environmental being. In which case, go! Great! Be a hunter-gatherer, right? Cos that's the least environmentally-destructive position that you can take. I don't want that. So we've got to find a middle ground.
	The other solution is to say "well look, hang on. Our currently - our cities in this country certainly are incredibly environmentally destructive. Just take traffic, for example. It creates a whole load of Co2 because cars can't get from one place to another, cos they're congested. That's just one little small thing. Imagine a city in which there wasn't not just traffic, but also you could build homes and houses and entire buildings and streets built with solar panels ... suddenly you start to re-imagine your environment, and working harmoniously with it, rather than living in basically Victorian cities, which weren't designed to live and breathe environmentally, if you want.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Surely that's not good for development within the cities, rather than expanding outwards, to restrict kind of the damage that urban areas do.
Shiv Malik:	Well, the problem with that is that people already own that land. So I'm less willing to evict those people at very high cost, then we're gonna be stuck.
Michael Buerk:	Shiv Malik, thank you very much indeed.
Shiv Malik:	Thank you.

The other solution is to say "well look, hang on. Our currently - our cities in this country certainly are incredibly environmentally destructive. Just take traffic, for example. It creates a whole load of Co2 because cars can't get from one place to another, cos they're congested. That's just one little small thing. Imagine a city in which there wasn't not just traffic, but also you could build homes and houses and entire buildings and streets built with solar panels ... , which weren't designed to live and breathe environmentally, if you want.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Surely that's not good for development within the cities, rather than expanding outwards, to restrict kind of the damage that urban areas do.
Shiv Malik:	Well, the problem with that is that people already own that land. So I'm less willing to evict those people at very high cost, then we're gonna be stuck.
Michael Buerk:	Shiv Malik, thank you very much indeed.
Shiv Malik:	Thank you.
Michael Buerk:	Our next witness is Tom Fyans, who's director of campaigns and policy at the Campaign to Protect Rural England, the CPRE. Some green belt land is beautiful, but a lot isn't. It's far bigger than it was originally intended, and the country's desperate for housing. A human is less important than hedgerows?
Tom Fyans:	Of course not, but it's also the most popular planning tool we've had since the war. It is to prevent urban sprawl, to stop growth, to promote urban regeneration ... but most importantly in a lot of ways now, it's the countryside next door for 30 million people. So when we talk about their wellbeing, the origins of the green belt were green lawns around the cities, for the workers to escape from the industrial conditions they were in for their health and wellbeing ... that's what it was for, it still happens now. There's a huge store of national capital in the green belt, it's worth preserving, we should be very proud of it, the world is envious of the green belt and has tried to copy it.
Michael Buerk:	George
George Buskell:	Surely the issue is that the green belt's almost completely outdated by now. I mean, last I checked, it's not 1955 any more and any policy that lasts that long surely needs to be at least updated and changed to suit modern needs. We live in a very different time now.
Tom Fyans:	I think it's more relevant than ever. If you look at the threats of climate change, we need green spaces around our cities more than ever. We need to flood resilient carbon capture. We need farmland that's productive to produce food in the cities. With a growing population, green spaces become more valuable and more environmentally important. So no, I think it's the opposite. It's been a successful policy. I came on the train this morning from London ... if we didn't have the green belt, Faversham would be part of London. The same growth as L.A. has experienced in the last fifty years ... we'd be sitting in London right now. It might have been an easier journey, but it certainly wouldn't have been a more beautiful one.
George Buskell:	Well, you mentioned that we have a growing population, but surely the point is that we do have a growing population. And so we need to build more homes, and we need to do it quickly. I mean, we're living in a time where millions of people can't actually afford homes in their local area. Isn't that an issue?
Tom Fyans:	Yes, we really do need more homes and CPRE really supports the right homes in the right places. The issue isn't land area, it's housing building rates. With this planning permissions for half a million homes that are being sat on, I came through Ebbsfleet in Kent on the train earlier on the train as well. They have built 500 houses in the last nine years on a development there. Nine years it's taken to build 500 houses. That's their planning permission for nine years, for 15 thousand houses. 
	Land is an issue, green belt is not the bogeyman of this crisis. There is a supply problem with housing, but that's because the government has stopped building houses since the war. There's plenty of brownfield land available, that's previously developed land. There's enough land to build at least 1.1 million houses at least in this country. Let's use that first and see where we are then. But developers don't want to use that land, because it's more expensive. green belt nice and cheap, fresh, somebody said earlier, let's just start anew, keep the profit margins high, so prices stay high. That's the real morality tale here.
George Buskell:	But surely the green belt at least contributes to that problem.
Tom Fyans:	No, it doesn't if you look at actually somewhere like Leicester which doesn't have a green belt, and Nottingham that doesn't have a green belt, house prices are exactly the same.
George Buskell:	But if you look at Cambridge, Oxford, and London, the places with you know the most recognisable green belts, and I think possibly the biggest green belts in England? Their housing prices are absolutely soaring. They're ridiculous.
Tom Fyans:	Well yes, but that's not all to do with the green belt. That's to do with the fact that people are now seeing houses as an investment rather than a home, and that is one of the problems. If you look at house prices in those places, they're unaffordable for most people in the country now. That is not to do with the green belt I'm afraid, and the government have recognised recently it's a broken housing market. They've also recognised the sanctity of the green belt and don't think they want to change it.
George Buskell:	So would you accept building on the green belt under certain circumstances?
Tom Fyans:	We already do, actually. When it's affordable housing, they're called Rural Exception Sites, so when there's small developments that a landowner has put forward ... usually the land is free, which makes it a big problem in this country land value. We do support brownfield development in the green belt as long as it doesn't affect the openness too much. We understand that there's an affordable housing crisis, but the types of houses that currently get built in the green belt are generally executive homes. 90% of the homes that we've looked at in the green belt in the moment are not social or affordable housing, so we're kidding ourselves if we think that we're going to build on the green belt and solve the housing crisis.

Michael Buerk:	Poppy, Poppy Cleary?
Poppy Cleary:	Yes, my first question to you is: the green belt was created in 1955, as George already outlined, we live in a very different society. But the green belt isn't necessarily a thing ... it's manmade, it's created by humans. Who's to say we can't tear it up and remake a different policy better-suited to our needs?
Tom Fyans:	Well, you can and that's what developers are arguing all the time. The only people, as I say who actually argue for development on the green belt are developers, who actually want to increase their profit margins. Common sense says you don't want to pay for the countryside next door to where most of your urban population live, but developers do want to tear it up, because it's a constraint. It's been a very successful constraint.
Poppy Cleary:	If it's a constraint, shouldn't we take away the constraint that should stop affordable houses being built in the right places? It's not just about creating the homes for people who want them, but they need to be in the right area.
Tom Fyans:	I would love that to be the right case in some ways, but we don't have a housing market that's delivering affordable homes. But back to the land issue, developers want the green belt because it's cheap. They're not bothered by the environmental benefits that we have as users when we use it.
Poppy Cleary:	But if the green belt is cheap, than certainly by opening up the entire area, you're gonna create the idea and the ability to create affordable homes in that area.
Tom Fyans:	If we had a house building sector that could build houses ... we've built less than 200 thousand homes a year consistently for the last 10, 20 years. We're just not building the houses. There's a constraint in supply, often intentionally by some of the developers, there's a skill shortage and there's a material shortage. There is just not the model at the moment. Councils are not allowed to borrow money to build social or affordable housing. We've got a problem, I'm not disputing we've got a serious affordability problem, but it's not really the green belt is often the easy bogeyman, and it's just not true.
Poppy Cleary:	Do you not think that if you opened up the green belt area that is so valuable to many people, that the housing market would adapt itself to enable affordable houses to be built in the areas that people want to live in?
Tom Fyans:	I don't think so. I think when you get planning permission on a piece of land, it goes up in value about 300 times. That's a land market problem that we've got, that's an economic problem. Communities don't benefit from that. The landowner does, and then the developer does by then building unaffordable houses. Community don't benefit at all, which is why you don't get that support for that type of housing in communities across the country at the moment.
Michael Buerk:	Tom Fyans, thank you very much indeed.
Tom Fyans:	Thank you.

Michael Buerk:	Our next witness is Toby Lloyd, who's head of housing development at Shelter, and co-author of a new book, Rethinking the Economics of Land and Housing, which places it squarely in today's issue. Toby Lloyd, is your basic position that "all property is theft", but home ownership is particularly pernicious and damaging to society?
Toby Lloyd:	No, absolutely not. That quote we use from Proudhon we use in the book, really, to expose the contradictions and tensions at the heart of the housing system, which are in fact at the heart of the liberal concept of private property and land. Proudhon also said that "property is liberty", and our conjecture is that he was right on both counts. Property is both things.
Michael Buerk:	Okay, Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Right. I want to pull it a little bit back to nature, rather than buildings. So, nature's value ... is it intrinsic, or is it instrumental?
Toby Lloyd:	Well firstly, if we're talking about green belt, as we've already heard that doesn't actually already have anything to do with the intrinsic value of nature. It is a planning policy for the containment of urban areas. And in fact, I suspect the debate would have been very different if all this time, instead of being called "green belt" it had been called "urban containment zones", or something kind of technical as most planning policies are ... we'd probably be having a very different conversation. 
	Unfortunately, this debate gets tied up with the debate around the intrinsic value of nature, which actually green belts have nothing to do with. There are bits of green belt land which are in the inner city, I know of one which is a derelict petrol station next to a tube station and a main road, but technically it is green belt land and an affordable housing provider cannot build affordable housing there, because that is green belt.
	Equally, there are huge amounts of green belts surrounding our cities, which are actually of extremely low environmental value, often because they [inaudible 00:24:46] desert for very very low biodiversity, far lower biodiversity than the urban areas in the inner city often are ... and also things like golf courses. You know, we use more land in England for golf than we do for homes. So when people say "we cannot afford the space to provide the homes we need", it is simply nonsense.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, what do you need nature to be to justify it's worth? How does it need to justify it's worth?
Toby Lloyd:	I don't think nature needs to justify it's worth at all. It is, as you said, intrinsic. The question here is how do we as a society regulate the amount of space that we use for homes, versus other uses?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Okay, but I mean development as we've seen it so far, all it's gone to do really is line the pockets of the developers themselves. How are we ensuring that the benefits of development are actually going to go to the people that need it?
Toby Lloyd:	I agree that we have a fundamental problem with the nature of our development industry in this country, which is far too predicated on delivering the highest possible returns, first to the landowners and second to developers, with the community and the people who actually need homes - including the quarter of a million people who are homeless in this country - are very, very distant third in that pecking order. So yes, I agree that the development sector needs urgent reform to provide the homes that we actually need, not just profits.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, I would like to bring you back onto this kind of point about our obligation to nature now that we know more. How do we know that we don't continue doing the damage that we have so far?
Toby Lloyd:	Firstly, the planning system, I think, does have strong tools for protection nature. Things like national parks, areas of outstanding national beauty ... these are all outstanding policies for protecting the really really valuable bits of nature ... I just don't think that the green belt per say is a particularly effective way of protecting nature. And in many ways, it's quite damaging. Millions of people commute every day across the greenbelt, twice. That is adding hugely to the carbon impact on ... of the economy, because they cannot live close to where the jobs are, because green belt policies insist that we build homes off and on greenfield sites beyond the green belt, and then demand that people commute thirty miles into town to work. That cannot be an environmentally sustainable or sensible position.

Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, what do you need nature to be to justify it's worth? How does it need to justify it's worth?
Toby Lloyd:	I don't think nature needs to justify it's worth at all. It is, as you said, intrinsic. The question here is how do we as a society regulate the amount of space that we use for homes, versus other uses?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Okay, but I mean development as we've seen it so far, all it's gone to do really is line the pockets of the developers themselves. How are we ensuring that the benefits of development are actually going to go to the people that need it?
Toby Lloyd:	I agree that we have a fundamental problem with the nature of our development industry in this country, which is far too predicated on delivering the highest possible returns, first to the landowners and second to developers, with the community and the people who actually need homes - including the quarter of a million people who are homeless in this country - are very, very distant third in that pecking order. So yes, I agree that the development sector needs urgent reform to provide the homes that we actually need, not just profits.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	So, I would like to bring you back onto this kind of point about our obligation to nature now that we know more. How do we know that we don't continue doing the damage that we have so far?
Toby Lloyd:	Firstly, the planning system, I think, does have strong tools for protection nature. Things like national parks, areas of outstanding national beauty ... these are all outstanding policies for protecting the really really valuable bits of nature ... I just don't think that the green belt per say is a particularly effective way of protecting nature. And in many ways, it's quite damaging. Millions of people commute every day across the greenbelt, twice. That is adding hugely to the carbon impact on ... of the economy, because they cannot live close to where the jobs are, because green belt policies insist that we build homes off and on greenfield sites beyond the green belt, and then demand that people commute thirty miles into town to work. That cannot be an environmentally sustainable or sensible position.
Michael Buerk:	Jane.
Jane Fidge:	Okay, for you ... is it a case of the collective good versus the individual good that's the problem here?
Toby Lloyd:	Yes, it is certainly a tension right at the heart of all planning decisions, and at the heart of property itself. By owning any property, you are inherently engaged in a tension between the rights of the individual and the surrounding community. The very debate we are having here is about the fact that some people may own bits of land, and may want to do things like develop it or farm it, and other people may have justifiable interest in that land ... heter as provision of recreation space or just a good view, or the value of nature. So yes, it is about that tension.
Jane Fidge:	But don't you think that maybe sort of small villages, communities, towns, families ... do they not count as their own collective? Do they not have their own collective good, to not think of their opinion ... because often, small villages will want to maintain their green belt, their area, their sort of beauty of their area. Do you not think that we should value their opinion?
Toby Lloyd:	Absolutely. And one of the problems with our development system is that it does not work anywhere closely enough or effectively enough with local communities. We do a lot of work with people who resist development, and they will tell you overwhelmingly that it's not the principle of houses being built that the oppose ... actually, lots of villages are worried that their villages are dying. Their schools are closing, their shops can't stay open, because they don't have the population. What they don't want is ugly, unsustainable, overpriced, badly supported housing being plunked onto their villages knowing that no one who lives there will be able to afford those homes. What they do want is genuinely sustainable, good-quality affordable housing, so that local people can afford to continue on living there.
Jane Fidge:	But there must be people out there that just want to maintain the green belt for natural value, not just because they want, you know, sustainable housing. Because they actually want to maintain the environment.
Toby Lloyd:	There are some, and there are also people who will resist any development at all. Mostly, those are people who are extremely well-housed themselves. The people who never get a say in these debates are people who are not well-housed, who have no hope of being able to rent or buy a decent place themselves.
Jane Fidge:	So, does that sort of mean that poorer people who then can't access this kind of housing, do they not really care about nature? Would they rather just, you know ... "let's just build on the green belt, I need houses, get rid of nature".
Toby Lloyd:	No, but this is just illustrative of how there are always tensions between different interests in society, and I don't see why we should always prejudice the interests of well-heeled, affluent, usually older homeowners over the interests of everyone else.

Michael Buerk:	Toby Lloyd, thanks very much indeed. 
	Our last witness is Howard Davies, who's chief executive of the National Association of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. I suppose the argument is, you'd only have to give up a small amount of green belt to build homes for a rather large number of individuals or families. It's people versus dirt, isn't it?
Howard Davies:	Not really. I think we would only need to give up a small amount of land to accommodate the developments required, full stop. I think the figures that were spoken about earlier, if you look at 11% of England is already developed? In order to accommodate two thousand houses for the next fifteen years, we're only looking at a figure of one percent anyway. So, if we can't find one percent out of the remainder of land that isn't protected in England, I'm not quite sure what we're doing wrong, to be honest.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	My first question is: you argue that human identity is linked to the natural environment. But wouldn't a human-centred approach to nature mean that you put humans first, so you would build new homes for humans and infrastructure for humans above everything else, no ifs, no buts, no "what about the environment"?
Howard Davies:	One of the bits of discussion that hasn't come out so far is the link that we inherently have with the environment: we are part of nature, and nature is part of us. We're distancing ourselves from it, as if it's something we can work on, we can manage, we can embed in our economic systems without actually maintaining the link that it inherently has with us as a species. We're talking about housing and accommodation here, but actually the greatest accommodation we have is our environment. It's just a different level, if we get that wrong, we get it all wrong.
Poppy Cleary:	But everybody has a different view of what the environment means and is to them. Mine is development, houses, parks, leisure centers, businesses, families being able to live in open countryside, and have good standards of living there and trove there. A countryside and environment and nature full of people. I'm sure that's different to yours.
Howard Davies: Everybody does have a different view. But where we do have commonality is an understanding that the benefits that we derive from a healthy, functioning environment supports us per se. Our water is filtered through our environment, our food comes from our environment, our health and well-being is ultimately dependent on the quality of that environment. So we may well differ in certain areas, but actually our fundamental well-being is linked to the sustainable management of our environment.
Poppy Cleary:	Can't you sustain the environment in England and in Britain and in the U.K. but still decide to build houses and develop in areas that don't need to be protected?
Howard Davies:	You could. There are plenty of places in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland I suspect that can be developed perfectly well. The reason these areas are protected is not because there's been some arbitrary decision to protect these areas because they fulfil certain criteria now. They've been protected for a long time. There is a national consensus that the value of some of these areas that require protection is just that: there's a national consensus on their value, hence the importance of protecting them.
Poppy Cleary:	But who decides how they're valuable? Who decides what's worth protecting and what's not worth protecting?
Howard Davies:	That's a very good question. I think our planning policies allow fulfilling engagement in the development of local plans and programs. There is also a national element. A lot of these areas were designated - this is not just green belt, this is areas of outstanding natural beauty and the national parks - were designated, or at least the process for setting their designation came apart shortly after the Second World War, when there was a real re-evaluation of what actually was important, and how we were actually going to look after those areas that we consider to be important in the nation's interest, not just for local interest.

Michael Buerk:	George.
George Buskell:	I think we've kind of been focusing on like housing in terms of development a bit too much. Now, lots of people like nature, they love fields, but they also don't like the fact that they have bad broadband connections. They don't like the fact that they have to travel 20 miles to get to a GP. Surely their concerns are important?
Howard Davies:	Absolutely, and in areas of outstanding natural beauty, the planning processes that take place within, or the area planning processes take into account people's concerns around broadband, around access to services. I think anybody managing any form of protected landscape has this central to their thinking. I think it's very different when the market doesn't necessarily support ... so you used broadband as an example. The market doesn't necessarily support the rollout of broadband to these deeply rural areas because, in the same way that housing is an issue, it's not always economically viable to do that. So there needs to be support mechanisms in place to actually deal with some of these issues. But these issues aren't there because these areas are protected, these areas that common across all rural areas, they happen to be protected as well.
George Buskell:	So what about the fact that the countryside's been changing since the industrial revolution, and surely progress is a good thing, and that we should be open-minded and forward-looking as opposed to looking backwards to this sort of 20's view of the countryside where we overly-romanticise it.
Howard Davies:	Yeah, absolutely. I couldn't agree more. The landscape has been changing for millennia, and not just for the last hundred years or so. These landscapes are products of human endeavour. They aren't natural, they're no more natural than anything else. It would be absolutely wrong to look at them as areas of preservation. That's not what they're about. 
	I would like to think that there's a lot of effort at the local level going into innovative housing, innovative design, innovative land management that actually ensures that these landscapes remain very contemporary, actually. They have been changing, they always will change, and actually designing or managing the design of that change is a really important step in their management.
	 The reason a lot of people want to move out to what they see as 'idyllic countryside' is that we don't even get our planning right in the towns and cities, where we should be concentrating most of our effort.

Michael Buerk:	Howard Davies, thank you very much indeed. 
	So, student panel, what do you think of what you heard? Jane. Shiv Malik, our first witness, I think he said that his generation, or the younger generation were serfs. Do you feel a trainee serf?
Jane Fidge:	Well, I'm gonna be honest. I don't agree with you, and I'm part of the younger generation. I'm not so obsessed with having a house that I want to build on the green belt, so I think that you've overlooked that a little, and you've overlooked the fact that young people aren't all obsessed with having a house.
Michael Buerk:	And Maddie, was it you that said "perhaps we ought to settle for less", are you the sort of person who would settle for less?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well, I mean when it comes down to it, I - don't shake your head, Poppy. When it comes down to it, I think my generation are the ones who have been educated the most about this topic. And I think it really comes out when you have arguments like this. And even in this room today, all of the talk of development has been about environmentally friendly development, and it shows a lot about the values in this very room, and about how much nature means to every single one of us. We can completely see how much nature means to us just by this conversation.
Michael Buerk:	And if the end result is ... I don't know, I mean ... maybe your own family own their own home, but you won't own your own home. You won't feel unfairly cheated or generationally abused?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well, my mother rents and my father owns, so I can see both sides of it. But I think we all accept the realities of what we have to live with, and we'll all deal with it. I don't think either way my quality of life is going to dramatically drop down the drain. I think I'll be fine, thanks.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy, you were shaking your head. Will you be fine?
Poppy Cleary:	I disagree, I-
Michael Buerk:	Or resentful?
Poppy Cleary:	I place a great importance on the prospect of owning a home in a city that I want to work in and that I want to live in for a lengthy period of time. I disagree with Jane's point that the young generation don't care about owning a home, because owning a home and having that security in your life is of great importance to me. With such an arbitrary piece of policy such as green belt land, it's not fair - especially on younger generations - but it's not fair on anybody that wants to live in an area that's heavily populated or very popular. I don't see the problem with urban sprawl.

Michael Buerk:	Second witness, Tom Fyans. George ... I mean all our witnesses had powerful arguments and well-organised arguments ... Tom Fyans' argument was centred on that there's a moral value to landscape, above and beyond human utility. Is that something you would take issue with?
George Buskell:	Yeah, I mean we would have to place moral importance on elements of landscape. People obviously get a lot of enjoyment out of countryside. The issue is when there are genuine human needs, like development and infrastructure, they need to be taken into account first.
Michael Buerk:	The argument I suppose that would resonate with a lot of people that Tom Fyans made was that actually green belt was made as attractive to developers because it's cheap to build on, not because it's the only place where you can build homes.
George Buskell:	If it is truly the case that developers only want to build on the green belt because it's cheap and because they want to increase their profit margins, that's obviously a problem and we should look to other places. But if it turns out to be the easiest and simplest solution to the problem, the problem at hand is big, and it's getting worse. And so, perhaps we may have to look at the cheapest and easiest solution.
Michael Buerk:	And Jane, his argument that, you know, if it wasn't for the green belt that Faversham would be on the outer ends of L.A., is that ... actually, that sounds rather attractive, come to think of it. But no, no, no. No.
Jane Fidge:	No, I think that's a very powerful point. Because I think that, really, when you go on the train from Faversham and you go up to London ... when you're sitting in that train, you don't really appreciate what you're going past. But this is miles and miles and miles of greenfield, but we would surely notice that, if that was all buildings. We would look out the window, and this sounds such a stupid point, but it would make train journeys so boring, if all you ever see out the window is the same thing over and over.
Michael Buerk:	And Poppy, somebody said "what's wrong with urban sprawl?" What is wrong with urban sprawl?
Poppy Cleary:	I don't think there is anything wrong with urban sprawl. Like one of the witnesses outlined, if we didn't have the green belt than Faversham would be part of London, and that's great. I'd love that. I think that would be beneficial to people. I think that city growth and the growth of areas where people want to live is important, and it's a benefit to humanity. 
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	The key to this argument and the key to moving forward is development within the cities, which is actually what people want. When people want to live in a city, they want to live in an urban area, they want to be close to things, they want to be close to facilities ... and I'm afraid I disagree with Poppy in the fact that yes, you want to live in a city, but there are many, many, many other people that want to live in the countryside.
Poppy Cleary:	But there's a limit [crosstalk 00:39:39] to how many people that cities can accommodate until you have no choice but to expand upon them.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy?
Poppy Cleary:	Whereas if you are so inclined with the view that you want to live in the countryside and you want to have acres of field around you, then there's more options for that sort of person than there are for a person who wants to live in a city.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	But the thing is, when you expand [crosstalk 00:40:00] outward the cities, you don't end up with people living in cities, you end up with people living in suburbia.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	[crosstalk 00:40:05] That's the difference.
Poppy Cleary:	No, you ... well, cities have grown considerably since they were first established. London has grown, and it can continue to grow.

Michael Buerk:	Can we make this a doubles match as well as a singles match?
	George, it's quite interesting with our next witness, Toby Lloyd, where ... or maybe I wasn't following it closely enough, but it's quite interesting with this argument about how much it is to do with the individuals' rights and responsibilities versus the communities', and which way round that argument was. Where do you think the locus of that argument lies?
George Buskell:	I think that the people that are in need of the homes are the community, and that ultimately they are being stopped by the individuals that perpetuate this. Sort of like an attitude towards homes where they're like an investment, rather than a place to live.
Michael Buerk:	So when the Faversham Heritage Society, if there is such a thing, objects to development plans, they're just a collection of atomised individuals, are they? With less moral force.
George Buskell:	I guess they've become sort of like a sort of a difference between the collective good and what the community wants. I think there definitely is a difference, people aren't infallible. 
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Could I just jump in there by [crosstalk 00:41:08] saying that, I mean, if you want to look at a collective, look at the popularity of the green belt policy.
George Buskell:	Go for it.
Michael Buerk:	Yeah, Maddie.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	If you want to look at us as a nation coming together over what we believe in and what we think has moral value, I think you'll find we like the countryside.
George Buskell:	But that doesn't make it the collective good.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Good point, but I still think you're a little bit outnumbered.
Michael Buerk:	We never say "good point" on the Moral Maze.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I take it back!
Michael Buerk:	Never give an inch!

Michael Buerk:	But Jane, do you not think that Toby had a point when he said that "if you're looking at it from an environmental perspective, here are people who are having to commute across the green belt" with its own inherent environmental problems?
Jane Fidge:	Obviously there's an issue with people having to commute to work. But I think that really, is the slight annoyance of having to get on a train to go to where you work or to go wherever, compared to sort of preserving nature? And to me that sounds like a much bigger sort of pro. To me, that's just ... that doesn't even ask a question. THat's just nature and someone having to be on a train for an extra 20 minutes. What do we value more?
Poppy Cleary:	You can still preserve nature [crosstalk 00:42:17] whilst accepting that cities can expand a bit.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	You can still preserve vast areas of nature in nature whilst accepting that you don't want a two hour commute into the city where your job is.
Jane Fidge:	Where would you ...
Michael Buerk:	Go on, Jane.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	Well ... oh, sorry.
Michael Buerk:	Oh sorry, go on Jane. Jane first, then Maddie.
Jane Fidge:	Where would you stop with this development, 'cos there's gonna be people everywhere. So how - where are you going to stop this development to sort of make it easier for everyone to get to work?
Poppy Cleary:	While still having [crosstalk 00:42:43] development in society.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	Like was point upon earlier by some of the witnesses. You can create new cities. You could completely re-imagine the environment and the landscape in which we live in, there hasn't been a new major city in years and years and years. We can completely restructure the way that we live in.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I think you'll find that if you end up doing that most people would ask to put a green belt around that as well.
Michael Buerk:	But Maddie, wouldn't you accept the argument put forward by the one side of the argument by two of our witnesses that in this debate, it is the well-housed, it is the affluent, dare I say it is the more elderly who have the say ... the homeless and the young don't have much of a say in this argument. Do you not think that's institutionally unfair?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	No, I mean, I take your point, if I'm allowed to say that on the Moral Maze.
Michael Buerk:	You can, to me.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	But honestly, I think everyone should have a say, irrespective of whether they are housed or not housed. Everyone's opinion on this is valid, and I don't own my own home and I am a member of the young generation, and I personally place more value on nature on the moment than ripping up plans for the green belt and expanding outward.
George Buskell:	Is it ...
Michael Buerk:	George.
George Buskell:	Is it morally justifiable that one group in society directly benefits and makes a huge amount of money off the fact that some people can't afford to buy their own homes?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I mean, then that's surely an issue with the property market, rather than actual protection for nature.

Michael Buerk:	Our last witness, Howard Davies. It got to an interesting binary issue - I can't remember who raised it with him - about whether the social was more important than the natural. Is that not what it boils down to, Poppy, do you think? It's human utility, it's ... human beings are much more important than any old tree is, as somebody mentioned.
Poppy Cleary:	I would agree with that statement. I think human beings are more important than the tree. Obviously, we need some sort of greenery and environment in order to have a remotely sustainable being, but I don't think that nature holds any sort of moral superiority to humans. I think humans are dominant over nature, and I think it should continue that way. I don't think there should be areas that exempt from that.
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I think you'll [crosstalk 00:45:01] that humans are in fact part of nature.
Michael Buerk:	Maddie?
Maddie Groeger-Wilson:	I don't think we can separate ourselves out. I mean, as much as we like to think we can dominate it and that we're somehow masters of the natural realm, I'm afraid it was here long before us, it'll be here long after we're gone and ... it was picked on a little bit in the debate, but I don't think we really put as much emphasis as we should on our connection with nature. Looking into - this is going to sound rather stupid, but looking into development for new hospital blocks, for example ... there has been a lot of emphasis on making sure people that are lying in their beds can look out their window and see a garden. Or look out and see some greenery, and have that connection with the natural world that we have so long been taught to ignore as people. Which is just wrong.
Poppy Cleary:	But that's a connection that you have [crosstalk 00:45:53] to the natural world, that's not a connection that I have to the natural world.
Michael Buerk:	Poppy.
Poppy Cleary:	I don't think that is part of my identity. I can understand that I'm part of an ecosystem and that I utilise as a human parts of the environment, but I don't think that people's value of nature should equate to a law or equate to regulations that stop me developing.

Michael Buerk:	George ... just going back to what Howard Davies was saying as our last witness. He was saying that even going along with the human utility argument, which you've espoused, it is rather important to us for utilitarian reasons.
George Buskell:	Yeah.
Michael Buerk:	If we develop on floodplains, we get a lot of flooding, our health is essentially - probably our physical and our mental health - are banned up in an environment which we enjoy and doesn't threaten us.
George Buskell:	I definitely argue that nature has utility, but as someone previously pointed out, the green belt isn't necessarily nature. And a lot of the green belt, although you can say "Oh, it's very nice. We can go out to this park, we can all go out and have some fun". Well, not everyone can, and a lot of it is actually used for ridiculous things, like private golf courses. Well who benefits from that? The people who can afford to play golf. It's not all valuable, in that sense.
Michael Buerk:	I must add golf club members to the list of well-heeled, affluent, and old people who have ...
	Jane, come on. Last word, with you.
Jane Fidge:	I think it was a very important point to make, that actually we need nature. We can't just brush it off as a few trees that we're getting rid of. Fundamentally, humans need nature to survive. We can't just sort of say "We need houses, so let's build it ... nature's gone, we won't be able to breathe, but it's fine". The fact that you're trying to boil it down to such a binary social and sort of the natural world ... you can't, because it's such a blurred line between the two, and it's so interconnected. You cannot really separate them. And I think if you try to do that, then it becomes quite a dangerous argument. I think you really have to think about the implications that both have on each other.

Michael Buerk:	Okay. So let's now turn to our established panel. Affluent, well-heeled, old golf club member, Claire Fox. How's your chipping these days?
Claire Fox:	But look. An interesting example of the dilemma we've got is that one of the panel made the point of, you know, when you're in your hospital bed, nature is valuable for humans because you look out and see, you know ...
Michael Buerk:	That was Maddie, I think.
Claire Fox:	Yes, Maddie. That ... great point. And that's a wonderful way to think of nature. And then I think ... but what I would say is, I want to be able to build the hospital. I want to be able to create antibiotics, and to be honest with you, I want a cure that's beyond looking out the window at the field. The field is a nice thing that we as humans might add, but it's very low down the pecking order of, in my sense, a sense of priorities.
	So I suppose that what I wanted to get over today is not that I despise the beauty of nature, although we've established that just 'cos the green belt's called "green" it's not necessarily beautiful greenery, but it's also the case that I think we are above and beyond nature. Nature is now at our service, and that's it's great beauty.
Michael Buerk:	Matthew?
Matthew Taylor:	And one of the things about human being should be our capacity for imagination. And what I found very disappointing in the arguments that we heard from Shiv Malik and Tobey Lloyd was a kind of lack of imagination. You know, they're ... we could massively increase the density of our cities. You know, as Jane said, there are 25 million empty bedrooms in our cities. We can have land taxes. There are all sorts of ways we could accommodate more people in better cities without having to damage nature. And you know ... and yet ... why is nature the victim of the human failure of our planning policy? Why don't we have human solutions to human problems, rather than saying "Well because we can't resolve this, because we can't resolve inequality, because we can't make developers more imaginative ... well, it's the green belt that has to suffer for our failure".
Michael Buerk:	Anne McElvoy has the answer to that question.
Anne McElvoy:	Well, I thought it was an interesting example of where there was a conflation, really, between what the green belt was - is it symbolic, or is it really a thing in itself? And I thought what we had tonight was an argument which we started out talking about whether the green belt was full of golf courses or this marvellous bit of nature that Goethe would have celebrated, had he been around now. 
	And actually we ended up with it being very functional and, for Jane it was about having something nice to look at on the train from London, she thought that a train journey might be a bit boring if we didn't have it. And I thought "Oh, well get something more sensational to read on the train". But it was an interesting example, it was different things to different people. That would suggest, to me, that the witnesses who were suggesting that you couldn't really touch it otherwise something dreadful would happen actually disagreed on what the something dreadful was.
Michael Buerk:	Giles.
Giles Fraser:	Anne's talking rubbish. And the reason's she's talking rubbish ... and Poppy was talking rubbish too. And the reason [crosstalk 00:50:48] that she was talking rubbish, too is because nature is not something 'out there' that you either like or you don't like.
Michael Buerk:	It's a technical term.
Giles Fraser:	And I thought that Jane made this point very well, and Maddie. Nature is us. It is who we are. We are as much a part of it as it is 'out there'. It's what we breathe, it's what we eat, so somehow the idea of being 'against nature' or 'for human beings' is a false distinction. Nature is us, and protecting nature is protecting us.
Matthew Taylor:	And I have to say, but can I just say ... Poppy, I don't want to put you on the spot, but I find your vision of the future terrifying. I mean, it feels like the whole world is a Naughty Story carpark. You know, I ...
Claire Fox:	But I think that, first of all: we are not nature. We are natural, but we overcome natural limits. That's why we're sitting in with electricity, with all the gains of modernity. And human consciousness and social ... our capacity to socialise and reflect and have a morality is what makes us distinct. If we were natural, we would just be. You know, nature's pretty grim. It's a fight, and it's savage, you want to overcome it.
Matthew Taylor:	Oh god.
Anne McElvoy:	Claire's having none of it!
Claire Fox:	I'm having none of that, but I also think it's at the moral heart of this [crosstalk 00:52:00] and I think that actually George and Poppy were impressing ...
Matthew Taylor:	So have we done nothing wrong? Okay, have we done nothing wrong, and is there nothing that human being have done in their dominion over nature that worries you? Is it all progress? Is everything progress? Is there nothing that's you'd like to go back and change? [crosstalk 00:52:11] The dodo?
Claire Fox:	I ... very good, very good. We're talking about what we morally aspire to. And your caricature of Poppy's point about development meaning a carpark is just cheap, right? It's called moving things forward and not getting stuck in the past.

