Thank you. Both Pfizer and AstraZeneca insist there is no shortage of vaccines. There, instead, appears to be a huge blockage in our ability to deploy the vaccine effectively and appears to stem from a lack of joined up planning and a refusal to use all the resources available to us. If Israel can manage 16,000 vaccinations every day, why can’t we do better?
Why can’t we, Nadhim.
Thank you very much for the question. So, the NHS in England and Wales and Scotland and Northern Ireland have put together a delivery plan. We started on 8 December with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, a vaccine that has to travel at minus 70 degrees Centigrade. We rolled out into primary care which is the most effective way to get to the most vulnerable, which we were focussing on which is the over 80s. We have now vaccinated 1 quarter, 25 percent of people who are over 80. In two weeks’ time they will have that protection when the vaccine begins to really take effect.
In terms of the question, could we move faster?
The limitation was actually the vaccine delivery. So with Pfizer/BioNTech we had to hold back 50 percent until the regulator, the MHRA and the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and the chief medical officers said we could go to a 12-week interval between doses instead of the three-week interval. Now, this week, as of Monday, we got 530,000 doses of the AstraZeneca Oxford vaccine, and we have millions of doses that will come in the next weeks and months to come. The target we have been set is to do the first four cohorts by middle of February. So stretching target, an ambitious target because you are talking about 13 plus million people who will be the vaccine.
It is just under 14 million, isn’t it? 13.9. Suzanne, you wanted back in. [DONE]
Thank you. Could I just make two points. Firstly, Israel have been deploying out the Pfizer vaccine. They had all the logistic issues we have, but they managed to roll out a million vaccines in 12 days. The second point, you mentioned about the 12-week gap between the first and second dose for Pfizer. The World Health Organisation yesterday were very clear that they reckoned that -- well, they stated that it should be between 21 and 28 days maximum gap between the first and second dose and, in exceptional circumstances, up to 6 weeks. This is a really, really important point. I’ve had five friends of mine contacting me today specifically worried about why we are not following the World Health Organisation rules and advice and Pfizer’s advice as well.
Shall I come to Mark on that.
Can I just say briefly, we’ve done 1.3 million vaccinations, a quarter of the over 80s I mentioned. Between 4 and 11 January you are going to see another step-up because the NHS plan and the rollout that has been delivered in a methodical way --
What kind of numbers?
Our target is to get to the 13.89 million. I can’t give you the numbers.
You must know what you’re aiming for.
Of course. But the data release is tomorrow and then from next week every single day the prime minister wants to, every day, say the data of everybody we vaccinated.
Clearly we’re in a race between getting people vaccinated and the new more transmissible variant. The numbers speak for themselves. The reality is that the supply of vaccine is limited at the moment so we need the maximum amount of protection from the doses of the vaccine that we’ve got. So the reality is that the first dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech is about 70 percent protection, it is reckoned, and Pfizer -- sorry, the AstraZeneca one is 70 percent and Pfizer/BioNTech is about 90 percent. If you can give it to 2,000 people and get that protection, then it makes sense to prolong it for 12 weeks. So long as people get the second dose, then it isn’t critical whether you get it quickly or a bit later in terms of getting the secondary immune response. So this has been looked at very carefully. There’s no doubt it isn’t perfect, but the situation here is the perfect may be the enemy of the good and what we need to do is get the maximum protection for the maximum number of people. Under those circumstances, I think most people who are immunologists, who are vaccine experts, and the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation have looked at the data, so not perfect but probably the right thing to do under the circumstances where the vaccine is limited.[DONE]
Rachel, you’re on the frontline in terms of dealing with patients. Of course we all desperately want this desperately we going as quick as we can?
It’s a very pertinent question. Not only a month after we started rolling out the Pfizer vaccine are three-quarters of the over 80s unvaccinated, and I appreciate there are logistical issues, but it is also the case of tens of thousands of NHS frontline and care staff are also, still, a month after vaccine roll-out began, unvaccinated. I’m sitting here tonight as someone who is completely unvaccinated. I am on COVID wards every day, working with COVID patients, I’m very frightened that I may bring the virus home. Who knows, I may kill my husband. There are paramedics, nurses, healthcare assistants, doctors, NHS and care workers in their thousands who every day are going into an environment in which the air is thick with COVID and we are completely unvaccinated. From our point of view it feels like, in the first wave in March and April, we were sent in with woefully inadequate PPE, again it may be an excuse, it may be a reality, but the government’s position on that was logistics, it’s not our fault, it’s a supply issue. Here we are again, second time round, completely exposed to a virus that has already killed over 650 frontline NHS and care staff. So this couldn’t be more pertinent.[DONE]
Which is why it is so important to make sure that the frontline --
You’re the man in charge. How quickly can Rachel get her vaccine?
You will see this week more social care staff are getting vaccinated. So we get through Category 1 and 2, then move to 3 and 4. By mid-February I guarantee you everybody will have been offered a vaccine and who should, I hope, take up the offer and be vaccinated.
There are 30,000 patients with COVID in our hospitals right now. So mid February is a long time to wait.
Andrea. [Andrea]: I would like to ask what the opinion is. The BMJ stated that there were concerns from GPs back as far as middle of December with them having been told to expect the vaccine, make plans, arrange patient appointments, then the vaccines didn’t turn up.
PS, you’re a surgeon.
Rachel is right. As frontline workers are exposed to this. She mentioned that 650 people, healthcare workers have died as a result of COVID but a lot of those healthcare workers are from the BME community and there has been no mention of the increased risk of COVID in the BME community with this vaccine roll-out. We’re not featured at all on the prioritisation schedules, and I really want to know why that is.
Colette? [Colette]: My question is that, obviously, we’ve a lot of logistical issues. I’m very grateful to everybody who works in vaccines, my husband does. I think you do an amazing job. My question is we got quite a few issues and we can see what other bottlenecks are we going to hit. We have the problem of supply. What about vaccinating people and the concerns that GPs have and people signing up to become part of the vaccination programme and having to go through a lot of red tape to provide themselves to do the service?
Anneleise, a lot of concerns coming from our audience. It is worth pointing out, isn’t it, in terms of comparisons to the EU, the UK is doing well in terms of getting the vaccine out. [Speaker] We are. But this is a race against time, as Mark just sated. Ultimately it was in the UK that we saw the first licensing of this Pfeiffer vaccine. We had the Oxford vaccine developed in our country. We must be ambitious. That means saying that 2 million a week target has to be a starting point. We need to be moving forward much more quickly. We need to be open about where there are problems. I think Susan was actually saying there what many of us have heard that there have been logistical issues and government must be open about where they are. There’s a huge amount of goodwill. People want to help in this national effort to get as many people as possible vaccinated. But that means being open about where there are problems, where there are blockages, just like Colette said, where there are logistical issues with getting people signed up. I’ve had retired healthcare workers in my constituency saying they want to help but because of the administrative blockages they can’t get through. We had so many problems with test and trace. We can’t have a repeat of those issues now when we’re rolling out the vaccine.[DONE]
Humphrey.
I think Annaliese is right in terms of the progress that needs to happen now. It can’t be much of a surprise that we need to do a rapid vaccine roll-out. We’ve known about this for 9 months, at some time we were going to have to do this. It is a logistics and planning exercise. We heard before the show that good people are involved, but I think you’ll find, Nadhim, there is a willingness across the population and across businesses to do whatever you need, whatever is required to accelerate and deliver this vaccine. I’ve got 270 sites around the country of gyms, the size of 3 or 4 tennis courts, I have memorandum on if you are low the government are paying, we and I’m sure every business in our situation that have been battered, frankly, by this virus, our biggest interest collectively as a country is seeing us come through this as swiftly as possible. You guys tell us what you need, we’ll make what’s available to you, what’s necessary, do anything in our power to make that happen. But let’s accelerate the process and be truly ambitious. If we can do 1 million a week, why can’t we do 4 million a week. There’s enough people, enough goodwill in this country to make that happen. I’m confident of that. [DONE]
The community pharmacy, there are 11,000 of them, have been saying today they typically do the flu jab vaccine, they know how to do it, they want to help with the coronavirus vaccine but they haven’t been able to. We spoke to a trade body before they came on air. They said the applications to do so have been closed since 6 December. They cannot help. Why won’t you let them help? Are you going to let the community pharmacies do the jobs? There’s 11,000 of them.
I hear you. If I can take you through the plan. It is important for everybody here, whether Annaliese in the Labour Party or the audience. So the plan is you’ve got hospital hubs, they have been operationalised, then the primary care networks. So 5 or 6 GPs in an area of 50,000 people come together, deciding who will lead, the others will support, then delivering really for work because they can reach the over 80s and they are going into the care homes because they are the most vulnerable people to this virus, the over 80s. Then the NHS frontline and social care, then we get to groups 3 and 4. Bear with me for a second. Beyond the primary care network, so 595 already vaccinating. By the end of the week that’s risen by 200. It will keep rising. Ultimately we get to about 1,500 sites because we are adding on national vaccination centres that will come online in details, and the community pharmacies which you talk about. 115 will come on line on the 11th of this month.
They can reply because the applications are closed for them to do so. Substantially we are making sure -- there are two ways to get to what Humphrey challenged us on. To get --
That’s why I’m asking about community pharmacies.
First you optimise your most effective route into those most vulnerable groups so the throughput, you get how many can they do a day, you optimise that, and you add more sites which is why we’re bringing on the community pharmacies and the independent sector to be involved because that way you add on. One last point. When you go through cohorts 1 to 4, our absolute target is to do that by mid February. When you get to the cohorts 5 to 9, you can go even further in terms of sites where you can begin to talk to other industries and the independent sector to actually get more people --[DONE]
The critical question is what is the rate-limiting step and have we got the vaccine in the vials? That’s the critical question. Because the very fact that we’ve had to delay the second injection suggests that the rate-limiting step is vaccines in vials. That’s where there will be huge competition. It turns on Rachel’s point. The disappointment is there wasn’t the manufacture at risk and testing of sufficient quantity so it was there ready to be rolled out.
Can I follow on from that point about disappointment.
Very briefly because there are other questions we need to get in.[DONE]
Unfortunately there has been a recurring theme throughout this of the government, particularly Boris Johnson, overpromising and underdelivering. The NHS is not responsible for Boris’s rhetoric, “world beating”, “moon shots”. On Monday he looked the nation in the eye and said his target, which we would deliver is 13.9 million vaccines by the middle of February. This morning, when you were challenged on that question you said you wouldn’t bandy around random numbers. The problem is your prime minister did that 48 hours earlier and, at the time you --
I’m on record as saying we will deliver that. I stand by that. We will absolutely deliver for the first four cohorts by mid February, I’m -- the NHS plan --
We will be delighted to see you back on this programme at that point and we’ll see where we are. Let me take another question. We could talk about just vaccines all night. It is critical. I appreciate that but there are other questions our audience want to put and I want to hear them. Chris.
We have entered a third lockdown. How many more lives were lost before the government decided to call this lockdown?
I know you are asking this because of what happened to your mother. Will you tell us briefly your story? [Chris Auron] yes. My mom, in the picture behind me, is 58 year old. I lost my mum on 9 April last year to COVID. There’s -- it’s been incredibly difficult as a family. There are 76,000 families out there that are now grieving the loss of loved ones, let alone how this is affecting our key workers. For example, the nurses in that hospital. My mum’s last support she had in her last moments was having two nurses hold her hands as she passed away.
I know you weren’t able to see her, Chris, but she was constantly in contact with you, talking about the kind of care she was receiving.
Yes, mum messaged for all of the 9 days she was in hospital, she messaged us last, actually, about four and a half hours before she passed away, that she said the nurses were amazing there but they were completely overwhelmed. This was during the first lockdown, during the first wave. Now, from what I hear, you know, we’ve got 30,000 people in intensive care units fighting for their lives. It is almost 3 times worse now than it was in the first. I wouldn’t want anybody to go through what I’m going through as a family and as 76,000 other families out there are going through the same.[DONE]
We have 30,000 in hospital. Rachel, of course, you are treating a lot of those people.
Chris, my heart goes out to you because I was having the kinds of conversations you were having with nurses and doctors when your mum’s life was in the balance in April, and I wouldn’t wish what she and what you as a family have gone through to anybody. There seems to be an increasing, very vocal minority in Britain at the moment who seems to think that somehow if a human being in British society is above a certain age or has medical comorbidities, which might be something as minor as eczema or asthma, then somehow their life is expendable, it doesn’t many anything, it is not worth fighting to save. I, as a doctor, think that is a reprehensible position because it divides British society into two tiers, the tier of people we say are worth saving and the tier we can just do without and expend. So I’m really, really sorry that you are one of the tens of thousands of people who have been through that. [DONE]
This presumably is taking a toll on you.
Absolutely. Today we have had the devastating news this afternoon that we have reached a truly world beating and bleak in the extreme milestone. Today, in the last 24-hours, over 1,000 people have lost their lives to COVID. Now that’s more than every single person who has died in Australia of COVID has died in their entire pandemic. We have lost more than the entire Australian death toll in 24-hours. Conditions in hospitals are unimaginable. We have ambulances queuing up outside, patients we can’t get them out of the ambulances into hospitals because every single bed in intensive care, in the wards, in A&E is full. Tonight I had messages from a doctor in London to tell me that police cars are delivering critically ill COVID patients into his hospital in London because there are no ambulances. That is how bad things are. How -- how could the government have allowed things to get so bad? SAGE told the government in September to have a circuit breaker. They told the government before Christmas: You have to lock down. And Boris Johnson ignored it because he is pathologically incapable of making a difficult decision. And that is reprehensible.[DONE]
I’m afraid the second wave was entirely predictable. There’s no question about that. But we are now where we are. Of course the critical --
Just to be clear, SAGE, the scientific advisory body that psychoanalyses the government that you are a part of, you called for tougher measures back in September.
We printed the evidence to the government that there was likely to be a second wave. Obviously the government is looking at the direct harms we are talking about now, also the economic damage, the loss to education, all these other things. It is for them to balance.[DONE]
Did you feel your advice was ignored or --
I’m sure the was delivered. It will need to be Nadhim tells us what the government decided to do with the advice. But the job of SAGE is to deliver the evidence and SAGE looks through the lens of the pandemic and the infection and it provides advice on that. It doesn’t provide the economic advice or the other advice. But I ask the critical thing is now everyone has to recognise that this lockdown is really serious. It is not only what the rules are but the way people obey them that matters as well. This really is an absolutely critical moment where the numbers are higher than they were in the first wave in almost everything. We’re going to see the deaths continue to rise for several weeks to come. People have to really, really socially distance.
Bethany, you are, working in intensive care at the moment. What’s your interns. [Bethany]: I think a lot of what Rachel said resonates. It is awful. I work with an fantastic team but everyone is exhausted. People on the wards are being found dead because there’s not enough people to look after them. There’s --
People are being found dead in intensive care? [Bethany]: No. So we have CPAP patients on the ward.
So people with breathing apparatus. [Bethany]: Yes. There’s not enough people to monitor them so the critical care outreach team who work with us will go down to see a patient who is found dead. I hate that the economy is being pitched against human lives. The economy would be much more functioning if we didn’t have this going on, if we had gone into lockdown earlier. [DONE]
Annaliese, they only called for full lockdown a few days ago.
This relates to what Mark said. This claim that somehow you can trade off the economy against public health, I’m afraid we’ve seen in spades in this country that simply doesn’t work. When people don’t have confidence that they are going to be safe, then they’re not actually going out and consuming. They’re not going out working. And having this extremely heavy death toll and this very severe impact that we’re seeing now has an enormous human cost but it has a human cost as well. The mental health impact is huge on the workforce. That won’t finish with the lockdown ends, that will continue for a very long time. In terms of the latest lockdown, yes, we did call for a full lockdown before the government announced it, but before Christmas, I have to say, we were very concerned about the situation then. I think we’re probably seeing, sadly, because of the lag in this disease then coming through into hospitals, we’re seeing some of the impact of what happened around that time and we said repeatedly to government then: Please, review the evidence around this situation. It is my understanding that the health secretary was talking about the new strain in part on 14 December, actually. The Prime Minister was informed about it on 18 December. We didn’t have a change in policy for a very, very long time. We can’t have this what feels like a constant lag between evidence coming through and then action.[DONE]
Mark, you’re nodding away to that. Are you frustrated?
Yes. Inevitably. I think this new variant has made things much, much more difficult. I think the challenge has been, really, the policy compromises between managing the economy, work, education, and managing the coronavirus has meant actually damage to neither has been minimised as much as it could have been.
Jim. [Jim]: It seems to me that one of the key reasons why lockdown occurs is to protect the NHS. Nightingale hospitals were built in the first lockdown with the help of the army, and they are huge facilities. Yet we don’t seem to be able to use those. I know it is because of a lack of resource, doctors and nurses to support those, to work in them. I’m wondering why more hasn’t been done to get those resources into play now.
James?[DONE] [James]: I think, look, you know, no one wants to put the economy before human life. We seem to have privatised schools but at the minute we’re getting none of it right. The economy is in tatters, 1,104 people died today and schools are shut. We’re not getting any of the balancing act right at all.
Sue, you had your hand up. [Sue]: Sorry, I was going to ask the same question Jim asked earlier.
Let’s hear from Dave. [Dave]: For me we just keep constantly looking backwards and not forwards. We keep blaming government, the opposition blame government, we blame the public. We blame all sorts of people and we are constantly looking backwards. We’re constantly saying look, this should have happened, that should have happened, we should have put this into place. We need to be looking forward, not backward. All the evaluation, all the criticism can be in the future. But now we need to be looking forward. We need to establish a way and a means to go forward with this and then we can, you know, have all the reflection and all the evaluation afterwards. Too many people, in my opinion, constantly are looking backwards and I think we really do need to go forwards.[DONE]
George? [George]: There’s loads of people out there at the moment who are furloughed and being paid to stay at home, yet they are going out taking second jobs, things like that, which is obviously spreading the virus around as well. I think people who actually flout the law, I think really should be basically made to pay back their furlough payments and fined. Because its -- you go to the supermarket, things like that, there’s people refusing to wear masks and other people just literally disrespecting what everybody is trying to do. You know, disrespecting the NHS, disrespecting what the whole country is trying to do. It is really, really frustrating. I think, anyway. [DONE]
Humphrey.
I run a commercial business, obviously, that relies on being opened and not locked down. So I’ve tried to keep our business as safe as possible for so long as possible. But I think Mark hit the nail on the head when he said that, you know, this new variant really changed the game. I think we need to move -- needed to move quicker to lockdown than we did move. Even now I would challenge us to say shouldn’t we be locked down even further. There are substantial parts of retail and other areas that still open that it is hard to regard as essential. I have nothing against those parts of retail, but the number one priority I heard reiterated by Rachel and other medics, I have a son, a 5th year medical student, we have talked about it at some length, if the number one priority when we get the vaccine programme up to that 3 million a week if we can, it is to limit transmission, then the lesson from around the world, I think, is we need to be prepared to lockdown really, really hard and pull together more in lockdown to limit those transmissions.
What would you do, Humphrey?
I would close all the other areas of retail that are not truly essential. I don’t say it with any joy but it is hard to regard off licences, garden centres and other forms of retail of that nature as essential. I would reinforce the calls to stay at home. I still think there’s a little bit of lackness in attitude around that. I think I would reinforce it, if necessary. That’s what we had to do last time. Maybe we need a bit more of that medicine now.
Nadhim? [Speaker]: Chris, I absolutely -- heart wrenching story. My cousin is a consultant anaesthetist in the NHS, got COVID, then his wife got it, when it progressively got worse it was a terrible moment. He has now recovered, but absolutely your challenge to us is the right one. I would just add, and I know people have sort of touched on it, but when the PM got the data on 18 December, we went into tier 4, or the 19th, within a day we went into tier 4. As this new variant has taken hold we’ve had to go into this much more severe national lockdown. So the idea that somehow, you know, we hadn’t been responding to how the virus was behaving --
There’s a rise of the eyebrows from Mark.[DONE]
We just have to look at the numbers rocketing up at the moment. I think what Humphrey says makes a lot of sense. We know there is one thing that will stop this virus. It can only carry on between proximity between people. If we keep people apart, it will come under control.
A tighter lockdown?
We can’t rule anything out. The best thing I can do for the whole country is make sure we deliver the vaccines as quickly as possible into people’s arms, the most vulnerable people, people in care homes, the over 80s, over 75s, over 70, as quickly as we can.
What about the Nightingale hospitals? [DONE]
That’s going to be one of the national vaccination centres. So they’re prepared for the additional need, that the NHS currently is under huge pressure, as Rachel says, but also for national vaccination.
Chris, you started us off on this subject talking about your experience with your mother, and all our condolences to you for that, of course. What do you think about what you heard?
It hasn’t answered the initial question in the sense of we still didn’t lock down even though the statistics were there before Christmas. I mean we can all seem to agree that we probably should have locked down earlier or maybe we need a more severe lockdown. Have we seen the numbers from people gathering at Christmas and potentially spreading this virus? Have we seen how many people that is going to affect? Are we ready for it? And do we have the manpower to get that vaccine out there and the manpower in our hospitals to treat those people? As those numbers now are going to -- they are going to climb. They are going to get worse. More people are going to die from this virus.[DONE]
I think we all know the numbers are going to climb, certainly for a while yet before, hopefully, they start to come down.
Do you think the government was right to wait until the first day of school to announce school closures? [Speaker] I have to say we found the last few days around this issue of schools opening very frustrated. We were continually saying to government what is the evidence around this. I have to say as the Labour Party we really didn’t want to see schools closing. We still want schools to be the last places to close and the first to reopen. [DONE]
You were calling for them to stay open on Monday morning then on Monday afternoon changed your mind.
That wasn’t what happened.
The shadow education said they wanted the schools to stay open, then in the afternoon they wanted them closed.
If at all possible. We still want them to stay open. With respect, I think we’ve entered a situation now where they have been closed because government says it is acting on that evidence, that it is necessary now, but we haven’t seen put into place the e-learning that’s necessary for those children so that they really can be receiving the kind of educational input they need. We’ve had so many months when this has been potentially on the cards. We had the first lockdown where there wasn’t that provision. It’s still not there. You know, now we’re saying to government, I suppose related to what Dave was saying before about looking forwards, we need to have a plan for when they’re going to be able to reopen. What will be the conditions so that we can get schools reopened? How are we going to deal with all these issues about digital devices and occasional disadvantage because this period has been really tough for so many families and we need a much stronger response from government than what we’ve seen so far.
Josh, you have your hand up. [DONE][Josh]: So today in Parliament Gavin Williams said he would trust teachers to decide students’ grades, yet he won’t trust teachers to decide when they shouldn’t be in school. When people go for jobs there’s people on this Panel we’ve spoken to already that are vastly experienced, that’s the reason they are in that job. Gavin Williams is the most -- it is unbelievable how his experience lacks so vastly in this job. Someone as an education minister, I have to say I think he’s the worst that Britain has ever seen and I think it is time he left that post, effective immediately.[DONE]
James, you are nodding your head vigorously to that. [James]: I think it is woeful, the constant U turns. You know, this new variant was a surprise. The second wave wasn’t. To get kids in school one day, put teachers at risk, families at risk, then to pull them out the next. It is embarrassing, really. You’re right, Gavin Williams is pathetic. It is embarrassing.
Alex?[DONE] [Alex]: I was going to mention Eat Out to Help Out. We should have spent the money making sure kids and the vulnerable in society had more. Every kid in the UK should have that, instead we spent on Eat Out to Help Out.
Susan. Susan Desouza?
Can I just come in on that point about Eat Out to Help Out. Yes, schools are extremely important. It is incredibly important that children are able to learn. But we also have a hospitality industry and we have a live entertainment industry and those are things we should be very, very proud of in this country. We are just going to lose them. I took full advantage of Eat Out to Help Out. I think I ate at 22 restaurants in August alone.
Whoa! Hang on a minute. You single-handedly propped the whole thing up.
Well, the first week I only went three times a week but by the second week I recognised I should go for lunch and dinner.
The question is about school closures. In our panel, Nicola, you are a teacher. What’s your view of Amanda’s question. Was the government right to wait until the first day of term to announce the closures? [Nicola]: I think there’s no doubt they weren’t correct. We could see in schools that numbers were rising and that teachers and students were struggling to be in school and struggling to staff school and struggling to feel safe and provide the education that we need to. I would like to agree with what’s been said about Gavin Williams. I think today, again, you know, we saw very vague announcements about exam grades and that just leads to more stress for our young people. They have had such a lot to put up with. They just had more uncertainty today.[DONE]
Nadhim, I assume you want to defend your colleague because clearly there has been a lot of criticism of Gavin Williams. What was that about, really, saying on Sunday schools are absolutely safe. The kids go on Monday and by the end of Monday saying, hang on, we’re going to completely change our mind, no, they’re not safe after all.
It was a last resort. The last thing we want to do is close schools.
One you couldn’t see coming for 24 hours.
No, for all the reasons everybody would share which is these are our future. The future generations and their education is incredibly important, hence why Gavin Williams has put -- I think about 750,000 laptops have gone out to the most vulnerable children that need them. The department has got two deals with two providers, I think Virgin and EE, to provide the ability for those children to be able to log on and get that online tuition.
Can I clarify something in your -- hang on just a second. [DONE]
I want to compliment the BBC coming forward with 3 hours of education for both secondary and primary school is a fantastic thing. Thank you Tim Davie for doing that.
Can I just -- just one second. In your guidelines, the depth of education guidelines say children WHO may have difficulty in engaging with remote education at home are classed as vulnerable. So they can go -- just as a point of information. Children in that position, can they go to school?[DONE]
Yes, and those of, obviously, the frontline who are protecting everyone from this evil virus.
Children who don’t have access to a laptop they can go to school at the moment.
Those who are vulnerable and --
Because they don’t have access to a laptop or device they can use. They can go to school? [Speakewe’re trying to make sure those children get the laptop.
I’m not sure how well known that was. But they can go to school as of tomorrow.
Both the vulnerable children and the children of frontline can go to school as we did in the first lockdown, you’ll recall. But, look, everybody here will, I think, understand this is a difficult situation. Every country -- someone talked about Israel earlier. Israel this week is debating another lockdown and the closure of schools. This is happening all around the world. We’re having to cope with this virus. We have this new variant which, clearly, is spiking, not just in London and the southeast but actually in the Midlands, we’re seeing it in the rest of the country, which is why the lockdown has come in. My job is to make sure that the NHS plan for vaccinations is delivered so that by the middle of February, those first four categories, the most vulnerable four categories, by the way, if you get through the 9 categories, we have essentially dealt with 99 percent of deaths.
When do you think you will have done that by?[DONE]
You can pretty much do the maths. If by mid February I’ve done the first four categories in terms of roughly 14 million people being offered the vaccine, the total 9 categories is about 26 million people. But we’ll
It is worth saying on the news this evening that the average age of people in intensive care is 60.
That’s what we’re seeing as well.[DONE]
So you are a long way off.
Which is why I said the nine categories.
You said we could do the maths. Just do it for us. When do you think you will get to the end of the 9 categories?
My target is mid February for the first cohort. I’m happy to come back. We are going to be publishing daily numbers so the nation can see where we’re at as we increase. We will do it as soon as possible but I’m hoping the 9 categories by spring will be done.
Please may I ask a simple question, I would love a simple answer. This is a question on behalf of all those teachers in and out of schools now, but all teachers who will be going back into schools when this lockdown is lifted. Can you, please, on behalf of the teaching profession, tonight guarantee that when this lockdown is lifted and when teachers go back into schools they will all have received a vaccination.
The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, this came up earlier, on BAME cohorts looking at all different cohorts, key workers, BAME people, they decided very clearly those that are most vulnerable are the nine categories they set us because age is the predictor, back to Mark’s point and SAGE, of COVID. When we do phase 1, teachers are right up there in terms of first in line. Some of them will be vulnerable and will be in phase 1 of the nine cohorts, but to be able to protect the most vulnerable and the frontline NHS workers and social care, we have to follow the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation.
I’m going to take another question. I want to squeeze it in if I can, from James Allcock. [James]: Furlough is vital but only if there remains a company to be furloughed from. Rishi Sunak said he would do whatever it would take to support SMEs. When did the government change attack on this, and why?
James, you run a pub? [James]: A small restaurant. Yes. I mean all the packages from the chancellor are fine but I have been there press conference after press conference wondering is Rishi Sunak going to appear, what is he going to offer. While the packages are better than nothing, they’re not enough. Let me tell you, I had to get Universal Credit at the start of this pandemic. Apparently I have to give the money back now because I earn too much. Well, I don’t earn too much. Rishi Sunak needs to either sharpen his pencil and get with the programme or get back home and get by on 80 percent of his income for himself and sit on furlough. Because it’s no picnic.
Humphrey. [DONE]
My heart goes out to James and the many other hundreds of thousands of operators of smaller businesses in the UK. It is tough as a large business operator as well, but people pushing forward on their own like that, I think it is a tremendous contribution. I would echo James’ views. It is always difficult when somebody gives you something, and the chancellor gave something out this week, to not be grateful for it. We are grateful for it, every little helps. But it really is not in line with the promise he made to do whatever it takes to support businesses. Tremendously tough for businesses like ours who have had to close down and take pain, like James’, on behalf of society as a whole. What I’m arguing for, and I’m sure James would as well, for a proportionate support. I run a large chain of budget gyms in that arena we had to close, by end of February, it will be 30 weeks out of the prior 50. James will have been in a similar position. Badly-impacted businesses require more targeted support. I think Annaliese has been vocal about this as well. It is a really important area. We want to work with government on behalf of our own business but many other actions like James’ out there. I know it is not easy for the chancellor or the government. Credit to them, they put a lot of effort into this. I think there’s much more we can do. Otherwise, otherwise, what we will face is an economic long number of businesses that are struggling to stay afloat for a long period of time. We won’t be able to reflate the economy and build the economy back. It is going to be so important to provide the services we want and the jobs in the future that we all want in the future from this.
Colette, you are nodding vigorously to that. [DONE][Colette]: There’s so much here. I completely align with Humphrey. I think this comes back to something Mark was saying as well. I’m in the hair and beauty sector. There’s a couple of things. We get the chancellor who goes on TV, with the offer of help, which is amazing, but the problem is we’re not seeing that come through. So in our sector we’ve been excluded from VAT cuts but yet we’ve been locked down as long as other sectors. Secondly, we have been promised grants from councils. A loft of these counsels are holding on to the money and it is not coming down to small businesses. I want to come back to something that Mark said. If you don’t look after your businesses and your employers, who are going to provide jobs? So this is the problem. We’re kind of having such unfair treatment across all sectors. Not just that, devolved governments are getting more money than some businesses in England. It is disproportionate and unfair. I’m an accountant, by the way, as well as a hairdresser. The problem with that is I see a really, really, really, like Humphrey says, a long COVID problem for employment when we are part of solution, not the problem. We want to help but we can’t unless people give us a life lines we so need.
Amanda?
I’m actually one of the few individuals who’s a sole trader who actually runs what is classed as an essential business on the high street. But there’s been these grants, and that’s great, but it is clear it is for those businesses that have to close. Yet we are on the high street, there’s just us, the butchers and a doctor. There’s nobody going past our shop for us to sell goods to.
You run a pet shop, don’t you, Amanda? [DONE]
I have got a pet shop, yes. We’re not selling any animals. It’s not appropriate. But it’s pet food. Consequently people are staying at home, which is good but, really, the only people passing us are going to the butcher or they’re sick, going to the doctor and they want to go home. There is no support for us. The saddest thing about it is to keep open we’re having to reduce our hours to make sure I can keep my staff going who were all self-employed. We fall, yet again, through the gaps and we don’t get anything.[DONE]
Andrea. [Andrea]: So I’m also self-employed and I’ve also fallen through the gaps completely. I have a work room in my own house so I don’t qualify for a business grant. I don’t have stock so I don’t qualify for any other subsidies. I tried to look at the self-employed version of the furlough scheme, not applicable to me. So there’s absolutely nothing. There’s huge amounts of talk within the Conservative government about supporting small actions, about trying to get small industry, crafts people going and get creative in there, but why is it so difficult for anybody to get anything unless you’ve either got three accountants working for you or practically destitute? [DONE]
Annaliese?
I think we just heard from so many people how hard it is for businesses in the moment in the UK. Unfortunately, we are in a situation where the country has had the worst recession of all major economies. We had the double tragedy, terrible health outcomes and a very, very poor economic situation as well. I would just say that the chancellor talks about how he put 280 billion pounds into his plan for jobs. That is a very significant investment but so much of that money has not been targeted effectively. We’ve seen the supermarkets, they’ve been giving money back that they received through the grant scheme. Where has that gone? We said as Labour we think that should be focused on some of those people like Andrea who have been missed out of those schemes. Some of the excluded groups.
You weren’t criticising those grants to the supermarkets at the time.
We have said that we think support should be better targeted. We did point to the fact that, for example in Labour-run-Wales, they didn’t have that grant support going to the very, very large companies. If you look at the self-employed income grant, you got with the initial phases of that exactly the same amount if your profit had gone down by £1 as if it had been wiped out completely. Now the point is, again going back to what Dave said before, it is not dwelling on the past it is looking to the future. What do we need to do now? We need to have a longer term timescale. We saw yet again, the prime minister earlier this week, new restrictions, no word about economic importance, then the chancellor running to catch up. We need a longer term plan for businesses, especially those who have a lot of debt now. The kind of pubs like James’ and others where they racked up that debt. How can we help them in the future to keep their staff on, hopefully getting additional staff in place as well?[DONE]
Nadhim.
James, to your question, the chancellor, and I think Annaliese talked about the 280 billion, what does that mean to a business like yours. First of all, the local authorities, and I agree with Colette, they should be making those grants land into businesses, and thank you for nodding there. That needs to happen. As business minister, before I was given this role as the vaccine deployment minister, actually got on the phone and called something like 89 chief executives when we did the initial grants to say how many have you got out, have they been delivered, because that needs to happen. My message, as would be Rishi Sunak’s message, that needs to happen, he made money available to target the most needy small businesses as well as for restaurants and your business, James, I think you said you have a restaurant, a small restaurant. £9,000 grant -- not loan, grant -- now for this period as well as --
It is up to £9,000. James are you getting the 9 thousand?
As well as the three months for being closed.
Should we hear from James. Are you getting that 9,000? [James]: No. And I’m a bit fed up with always hearing the top line figure. I get £4,000. With respect, Nadhim, why not ask you to list what you have already done. I asked you to tell me why you are not doing enough. I know what’s been done, I’m aware of that, but what’s happening now is not enough. It is taking too long. The promises of doing everything you can are done. Why should I borrow money to keep my business going? I might as well not bother.
The 4.8 billion was announced after the prime minister announced the lockdown. So this is new support for the -- targeted very much at the hospitality sector. There is also, of course, the -- when I was dealing with this --
You have 10 seconds left.
The kick starter was to get young people into training for 6 months to end up in a job. They are the most important. That’s where you need to target, the people most vulnerable to losing their job.