Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Keith Brown, deputy leader of the Scottish National Party and former Economy Secretary in the Scottish Government. Elected as leader of the Scottish Conservative Party less than a year ago, currently an MP at Westminster, Douglas Ross. Anas Sarwar, as of two months ago, the new leader of the Scottish Labour Party and the UK’s first Muslim and person of Asian descent to become a party leader. Canadian-born engineer and co-leader of the Scottish Greens, Lorna Slater. And one month short of his tenth anniversary as leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, Willie Rennie.
Our first question tonight is from Blair [Wondin 01:22].
Hello. If the main Scottish elections return a full independence government, what moral and legal right does the Westminster government have to deny another independence referendum?
Doug?
Well, I want to stop a pro-independence majority government, I want to stop the SNP having a majority at this election, as the Scottish Conservatives did five years ago. It was by people uniting behind the Scottish Conservatives that stopped that SNP majority in 2016, and people can do that again at this election.
And I think it’s so important because we’re still coming through the health pandemic, we’re still coming through the effects of COVID-19 that we’ve all been through and the restrictions for the last 12 months. And I really think we need a parliament that is focused only on our recovery, only on rebuilding after the last 12 months that we’ve all been through, rather than one distracted by another independence referendum.
And given that Boris Johnson has already said that he will not grant a second independence referendum that’s job done, isn’t it? Why does anybody need to vote for you?
Because Keith Brown, as deputy leader of the SNP, launched their 11-point plan for another independence referendum and said they would ignore Westminster; if they didn’t get a Section 30 order, which is the route that was taken in 2014, they would ignore that and hold a wild cat illegal referendum anyway. And that would bring uncertainty when we should be focused on our recovery, and I don’t want that uncertainty in Scotland over the next five years when our parliament has to be focused to protect people’s jobs, to support the NHS, to rebuild our educational standards. All of these things would play second fiddle to a nationalist government who are only interested in separation.
Do you want that uncertainty, Keith?
I want that referendum; and the UK has no authority to prevent that referendum taking place if the people of Scotland vote for that, which was Blair’s question. And I should say on the issue of a wild cat referendum, the wild cat or renegade government in this country is the UK government. They’ve been taken to the Supreme Court, who struck down their decision to try and prorogue the UK parliament; they’ve signed international agreements with the EU which were immediately renounced afterwards; they’ve had ructions going on.
Yes, but they haven’t done anything wild cat about independence.
Well, I think trying to stop parliament from meeting is pretty wild cat to me. And the simple fact is that the people who should decide if there’s a referendum are the people of Scotland. So, I don't think for a second Boris Johnson will continue to refuse to agree a Section 20 agreement. And it will be an agreement, we’re not pleading for that, we want to have that, it’s the best way to have the referendum. But he will not stand in the way of a referendum in Scotland if the people in Scotland vote for it.
Well, of course he says he will do exactly that. Let’s hear from some of our audience from Scotland – Nirana?
Shouldn’t the Scottish government, I want to ask Keith Brown, take the power focus…focus on power away from it and do welfare to Scottish population, which we need – education, health, industry, unemployment, all these problems are staring in our face. And that’s the reason that the Scottish government, now the SNP, that the people would like to…people don’t want to see another referendum.
Okay, Nirana, thank you. Keith, do you want to answer that briefly before I move on?
Yeah, if I can. I think this is a really important question and it’s important because this is a really really important election, and I’ve stood in every single Scottish parliament election, this is easily the most important. So, you have two paths. One is if the UK is allowed to go ahead, for example, with the ability to sign trade deals which then start to undermine our NHS. If they default, as Douglas has already done, to tax cuts and austerity as their way to deal with the recovery, that’s not going to suit Scotland.
This is our chance to make our own decisions. And if you don’t exercise power over yourself, somebody else exercises power over you and they do it in their interest and not in your interest. That’s why we have to have the powers to have the right recovery for Scotland.
I’ll come to you in a minute, I just want to hear a little more from the audience. Emma?
Hi there. I was previously an SNP vote, but basically I feel that your whole manifesto has been overridden by the fact that we want [independence 05:19].
Personally, it’s putting me off being an SNP voter and I’m having to look at other options. I’m actually sat on my postal vote because I don’t really know – how can you convince me that another referendum is in the best interests of the country?
Okay. John?
I was curious to ask Douglas Ross – Blair asked a fairly straightforward question and Douglas failed to answer it, as he does so many times, he just went off on a tangent about independence – why don’t you answer the question about if there’s a majority in parliament, isn’t that enough?
Well, the question from Blair was about independence, which is why I answered about independence. But we hear from Emma, a former SNP supporter, saying she won’t support the party now because they’re putting independence above our recovery. What I’m saying as a Scottish Conservative is, we can stop that, we can stop the uncertainty and focus on jobs…
Okay, you’ve made that point.
…focus on recovery, focus on education, all the things we want to focus on in the next parliament.
Willie?
Yeah, I mean, this country has been bitterly divided for, what, ten years now with arguments over independence, then over Brexit and we’ve been through one hell of a year with the pandemic.
I agree with Nerinda when she says that we need to focus on the people who are waiting, for instance, over a year to get mental health treatment; people who have lost out on education for the last year. What we need to do is to try and bring the country together; we won’t get that with these two parties who are determined to feed off each other and the [bitterness 06:46] that’s grown up over that period. What we need to do is to try and bring people…
And why do you think more people aren’t listening to your message?
Well, what we need to do is to try and bring people together because we’ll need the skills and talents of everyone in this country to get through this recovery. We won’t do that if the country is divided by independence. And that’s why I think it’s most interesting that there are SNP supporters, and I’ve come across many of them, who are just sick to the back teeth of the divisions and they want to come together for a change. We can put aside our differences for the next five years to try and unite the country to get through this recovery; we owe it to these people to do exactly that.
The unionists want independence, the question of independence, to go away. Of course you want us to forget about independence and think about bringing the country together, but you can’t sweep it under the rug.
Or concentrate on the recovery, which is what they want.
Thanks to the Scottish Greens we have had a parliamentary majority for independence all these last five years, and I fully expect that, thanks to the Scottish Greens, we will have a parliamentary majority for independence this next parliamentary term. So the question is…
What an arrogant assumption, to assume that you’re going to win the election before anybody’s voted.
So, the question is, what does that mean for who gets to decide on the recovery? So, we’ve seen what, for example, Boris Johnson considers recovery – more nuclear weapons, a tiny one per cent pay rise for nurses that’s essentially a tax cut. And very…you know, Rishi Sunak doesn’t say it on the telly but eight per cent cuts to public services. That is not recovery; that is grinding austerity, more grinding austerity.
For recovery there has to be investment, there has to be hope and opportunity, and that means looking at what kind of country we want to be and who gets to make the decisions about that country. And I think it’s time we asked the people of Scotland again, who makes those decisions – the Brexiteer Tories in London or a government in Scotland that we’ve actually voted for?
I think what you’ve seen already tonight is a preview of what could be the next parliament – we can choose something different. We can choose to recognise that COVID didn’t choose between yes no, leave and remain; the aftermath is not going to choose between yes no, leave and remain.
And whilst we’ve been separated from our families like never before, we’ve actually come together as a country like never before to confront COVID. And one of the things that I think is missing, particularly from the SNP and the Tories, is they somehow want to ignore the fact that this isn’t an ordinary election. This is a pandemic election when 10,000 of our fellow citizens have lost their lives, when 360,000 of our fellow citizens are on furlough…
But what will you do, Anas, if this election does return a pro-independence majority, will you just ignore that?
Well, that’s why, Fiona, I’m offering something different. I want us to choose something different…
That’s [voices overlap 09:20].
…and to have a different alternative.
But will you ignore that pro-independence majority?
Well, look, I’m going to make the case…
Keeping us in the union isn’t different; that’s more of the same – we can do something different.
No, absolutely not because, Lorna, the mistake that you make and, with respect, Keith and to some extent Douglas makes, is that you want to pretend that somehow it’s some kind of light switch moment, that we can just decide to have a referendum and decide to have independence and it’s a light switch moment and it doesn’t take years of focus.
People decide. The public decide.
Brexit took four and a half years of focus away from our country. Are we honestly saying that even in this midst of a pandemic we can’t come together for the sake of the national interest and focus on our recovery? Are we honestly saying…?
But we can’t come together, Anas.
Are we honestly saying when 360,000 of our fellow citizens are at home on furlough, worried about if and when they’ll have a job to go back to, and we’re going to say, no, politicians want to go back to arguing with each other and we want to go back to those old arguments. I think we could do something different
And we can, if we can get rid of that threat of an independence referendum.
I think we can offer something better than what the political bubbles are offering right now.
Because you rightly speak about the number on furlough; we know from the IFS…the Institute of Fiscal Studies are saying unemployment in Scotland could peak at 7.6 per cent this year. Yet Keith, you’ve said…
It’s lower than the UK; unemployment is lower in Scotland.
Keith, you’ve said you want a referendum this year.
But, Douglas, you’re right to say that about furlough and you’re right to say that about unemployment, but the problem is…
And if we can focus in on our recovery…
But the problem you have, Douglas, is that you are just as determined to talk about division as Keith and Lorna are because you all…
No, I’m determined to stop it.
You all feed off division to suit your own political interest, not to suit the national interest. I would much rather we focused on what united us as a country rather than what divides…
How is Brexit and Tories in Westminster in the national interest?
Can you imagine…? Lorna, you yourself have said that we’ve got to confront the climate emergency, we’ve got nine years to confront the climate emergency…
We do.
…at the very heart of your policies…
Anas, you said today at your manifesto launch…
…and do you really want to spend five years of that nine years arguing about independence?
…let’s put aside things we disagree on and let’s [voices overlap 11:09].
Hang on, if you talk at the same time then I can’t hear you and neither can anyone at home. Let…
Well, Anas said today and it was in the manifesto, and it’s a crucial point, this, let’s leave aside the things that we disagree on – we disagree on spending billions of pounds more money on nuclear weapons, on the two-child policy cap, on the rape clause. Now on the [voices overlap 11:25] coming from the Tories.
[Voices overlap 11:25] in Scotland do something about it.
We disagree, and you cannot ignore those things, Anas, you have to front up to them if you want to form part of the government and if you want to be seen as [voices overlap11:32] as challenging it.
You’re right. Keith, you’re right…
The Tories are after the powers of the Scottish parliament…
Well, let me give you an example.
Somebody has to stand up to it and it’s not going to be the Labour Party, unfortunately.
Well, let me give you an example, Keith. You’ve mentioned two policies right there. We have welfare powers in Scotland to top up any new benefit we wish and to create any new benefit we wish.
And we’ve done that with the bedroom tax.
Why don’t we use the powers we have?
We’ve done that.
Why not focus on what we can do? You have been in government for 14 years.
We can’t change the two-child policy, we can’t change the rape clause.
Nicola Sturgeon’s been trying to change the rape clause for seven years and in that time the attainment gap has widened, our NHS has gone backwards not forwards.
No, it’s not.
And we have seen our children’s mental health suffer as a result.
Okay. Willie, I know you want to come back in. I’m just going to hear very briefly from the audience and then I’m going to come to you. Ryan?
Yes, I would just say in response to the point that was made by Keith regarding the question of independence, I would just simply say that it seems as if we have a very simple choice in the next parliament, whether we spend it debating an issue that in reality was resolved almost seven years ago. And I know that people will make the case that things have happened since then, but we were told at the time it was a one in a generation vote, and we voted and we voted to stay part of the United Kingdom. And I just don’t understand how, you know, you can make the argument how we’re going to recover from this pandemic but at the same time we’re going to spend two years…
I think it’s now the SNP’s proposals are now saying they’re going to wait now until 2023. You know, at least Alex Salmond in the Alba Party are saying they’re going to just get on with it, they’d like to do one just straight after the election. I mean, I would actually…I’d prefer none of it but I’d go with that approach, it seems to be the better one to do. But I just think that’s a simple choice – recovery, or debate stuff that we’ve already been debating for the last few years.
Well, we’ve only been on air for about ten minutes but by the looks of it there’s scant chance of that from what I can see here.
But there is a chance of that.
Hang on a sec. Angela, you’ve got your hand up.
Nerinda mentioned at the very start about focusing on the independence referendum, or building the economy and recovering the health service. To me they’re not mutually exclusive. We can still have an independence referendum and still focus on these areas. SNP has seen a huge rise in NHS spending. We’ve the most GPs, nurses, midwives, dentists and NHS staff per head across Britain. We have the best performing accident and emergency units, we have free prescriptions and eye tests. So, to me they are not mutually exclusive, we can still have an independence referendum and we can still focus on these key priority areas.
I mean, clearly there are other NHS statistics that you could cite that aren’t quite so favourable, but I hear what you say, Angela. Willie?
So, Fiona, let’s take the issue of drugs. Scotland’s got a terrible record on drug deaths – 1,256 people died, it’s the worst in Europe, in fact it’s the worst in the developed world, it’s three and a half times what it is in England. And the confession from the First Minister was that through the independence debate she took her eye off the ball. And we know from the previous Justice Secretary that they didn’t want to deal with the issue because it was too difficult and it might repeal people from voting for independence at the time. Now, that’s what we could have multiplied in the next five years. If the SNP, and the Greens, allow us to have a parliament that’s focused on independence, many many other things will be neglected. More people will die. This is real people’s lives. We need to focus on dealing with the massive challenges we’ve got.
We’ve got a climate emergency, we’ve got NHS waiting times that are as long as your arm, we’ve got an attainment gap that is as wide as ever. And we’ve got mental health waits, people waiting an age, young people waiting for a year, it’s appalling. That’s what we should be focusing on. We’ve got enough on our plate without arguing more about independence. Let’s bring everybody here together. There are a lot of talented people in the parliament that could actually resolve things. We did it through the pandemic; we did some tremendous cross-party work on dealing with a massive challenge. I want more of that rather than more of the division that is inevitable even with the best of intentions of having a debate that’s fruitful. We will have divisions and the divisions will lead to us taking more eyes off more balls and more people will lose their lives. This is very serious and we do need to focus.
Doug?
We do; and that’s where I believe we can, if we stop that SNP majority, focus on the recovery, on rebuilding, on drug deaths, on supporting the NHS, on rebuilding our educational standards.
Scotland was once a world leader, it’s now internationally average for education. And all these things we can do if we don’t have the threat of a referendum hanging over us. And I’d just say to Keith, what do you think, tonight, listening to Emma, as a former SNP voter, saying the SNP are only focused on another independence referendum? That’s after 14 years you’ve been in power – you’re offering nothing new to the people of Scotland other than more division with another referendum.
Absolutely untrue [voices overlap16:54].
But that’s what Emma’s saying.
If I can just answer the question, Douglas. If Emma would like to look at the manifesto, she’ll see there is a mention, of course, of the referendum because we do think it’s crucial to how we actually get through the pandemic. But the national care service, the increased funding for the NHS, the baby box continuing, the fact that we’re going to have free school males for every child…and breakfasts and lunches for every child in primary school. There’s a whole host of other stuff in there.
And as has been said by Angela, we are achieving fantastic results in our NHS, some tremendous things in education, there are difficulties as well but there are tremendous things. It’s not the case the two are exclusive, as Angela says; it’s possible to do these things at the same time.
But what do you say [voices overlap 17:33].
[Voices overlap 17:32].
There has been some joint working in the parliament, there’s no question of that. But the idea you ask people to set aside, first of all, the main route to get through the pandemic of the same powers as other countries, resources, other countries have to deal with it, rather than wait, as we had to do over furlough, before it’s a problem in the South East of England before furlough was granted again to Wales and Scotland – that can’t be the way to deal with a pandemic. It is possible to concentrate on more than one thing at a time.
But Keith, how many [voices overlap 17:58].
And look at the Tories – they had the pandemic to deal with and they had Brexit and they went and pushed through a hard Brexit in the teeth of the pandemic. So, I’ll take no lessons from Douglas Ross about trying to do two things at once.
What about the things which you’re losing?
But do you think they did both those things well, then?
No, I think it was appalling.
Right, okay.
And if you go back to the point that was made about the question of Brexit, in the referendum of 2014 we were told the only way to guarantee Scotland’s place in the EU was to vote no. Well, people voted no and it’s been changed, we’re being dragged out of the EU against our will. But that’s also one of the routes that we can have back to prosperity, a more equal and just country, if we get back into the EU and with the powers of on independent country.
But Keith, let’s go back to talking about what you do have the power over. Willie mentioned drugs deaths. How many times during this pandemic has someone picked up the phone to call the crisis mental health service and the call’s gone unanswered?
Well, you’ve obviously checked that fact.
Twenty-five thousand times someone’s picked up the phone and the call’s gone unanswered. How many children are waiting over a year for their mental health support right now? Fifteen hundred children missing out on mental health support or waiting over a year. How many undiagnosed cancers have there been in the last year?
I’ve got…well, hang on….
Seven thousand undiagnosed cancers.
Are these questions to be answered or just a series of questions, Anas?
And if you don’t know the answers to those questions…
It’s not the Anas Question Time Show.
You’re in power for 14 years and they are huge challenges.
That’s the question…you can answer some of these questions, Anas.
They are huge challenges [voices overlap 19:13].
How are you going to do this without the full powers of independence? Are you going to challenge the nuclear weapons?
Are you honestly, Keith…?
Are you going to challenge the UK government with the cuts or do you just accept that Boris has got a veto over the things that we want to try [voices overlap 19:24] of our country?
Keith, are you honestly going to…?
The two-child policy cap, the rape clause, are you going to challenge that?
Are you honestly going to be asked about cancer…
Are you not going to challenge that?
…and talk about independence? Are you honestly going to be asked about suicide and talk about independence?
[You’re doing the same as 19:31] Keir Starmer.
Okay, wait a minute, one at a time.
Can I just clarify that, Fiona? Are you honestly saying that you’re going to be asked about cancer and talk about referendums? You’re going to be asked about suicides…
You’re asking me four questions at once here, Anas.
…and you’re going to answer about referendums?
The point I’m making is, you want to give Boris Johnson…
Why not focus on what you have the power over?
…the power to veto what we have to do in order to prove whether it’s spending billions of pounds more on nuclear weapons…
And you know this is a pandemic.
Whether it’s things like the rape clause, you’re willing to say, let’s put that aside and forget about it?
Not at all.
I’m not and the SNP’s not and we want a better society…
But what about cancer here, what about suicides, what about drugs deaths?
…than what Boris Johnson does.
Okay. Moira, you had your hand up?
Yeah, can you hear me?
We can.
It just amazes me how they’re always saying that Scotland’s worse off. If you look at England as a whole, and other parts of the UK, I think that Scotland does quite well with our health service. The vaccination programme is better. There may be a problem with drugs but I don’t believe that it’s that much worse than in England, and it’s always talked about it because the drug problems worse here. There’s a lot more things worse. Homelessness, that’s why there’s so many people on the streets – what else have they got to turn to? They turn to drugs but that’s not just exclusive to Scotland, it’s all over.
Well, just in terms of the drugs deaths, the figures are considerably worse for Scotland, I’m afraid, that is just a fact.
And not just in the UK but across Europe – the highest drug deaths anywhere in Europe. And we know that has doubled since Nicola Sturgeon became First Minister seven years ago. So, when she says she took her eye off the ball, that has led to thousands losing their lives, and families being ripped apart because of that devastation of losing a loved one so early. So we have to focus on drug deaths, we have to focus on education.
Are you going to repeal the Misuse of Drugs Act, Douglas, because that stops us from having the powers that we need in Scotland to treat drug deaths as a social issue.
I…
We have an excellent history in Scotland of treating things like knife crime, things like minimum alcohol pricing for minimising the harm, but our hands are tied when it comes to the Misuse of Drugs Act.
But, Lorna, I agree with you.
Because that is a UK law, it’s out of date; the war on drugs has failed and it is…
But I agree with you, Lorna, I agree with you.
Well, let’s just hear from Willie a minute. Sorry, just let me hear from Willie a minute.
What is utterly depressing is that every issue, every single issue that exists, has to be turned into a constitutional debate by these two people.
Because it would be better in an independent Scotland.
[Look, she answered 21:50] the question. They turn it into a constitutional debate every single time – and neglect their own responsibilities with the powers that they already have to do something about it.
Nonsense.
That’s why we’ve got the highest drugs death rate in Europe.
[Voices overlap 21:59].
That’s why we’ve got 380,000 people who’ve been waiting for the 18-week treatment guarantee, a law that was put in place and it’s been broken that many times. That’s why we’ve not met our cancer waiting time since 2013; the A&E time, we’ve not met that for years – all of these things on your watch, Keith.
The best in the UK.
Yet your answer is, let’s talk about independence. It’s the best cover story that you’ve got. The reality is, you need to focus on doing your job rather than looking for power from somewhere else just because you don’t want to talk about your failures in government. This is a failed government.
Those things can both be true.
Okay, I’m just going to stop you here. I hear what you all say but I’ve got a number of questions I want to get through so I’m going to move on, forgive me. Let’s hear a question from Alan Robertson.
Good evening. How does each party view the long-term future for oil and gas workers, with plans to scale back production in the new future, given the number of people in Scotland who desperately rely on it, especially younger workers?
And Alan, you work in the oil and gas industry – what’s your perspective?
Yes, I do, I work in subsea sector. And we’ve had a number of challenges over the years, certainly in recent years, which has been exacerbated lately with the COVID-19 pandemic. But things seem to be stabling out a bit now but of course we now hear that the Green Party would like us to be ceasing production in the next ten years and potentially working alongside the SNP to support a majority there. Which is obviously a worry because it’s a concern for people who work in the industry but also for further investment in the industry, which I think we need as a country.
Can I come in on that one? I absolutely understand your concern and I share the same concern for workers in the oil and gas industry. I’m a renewables engineer, I’m an electro-mechanical engineer, I work for a company that makes tidal turbines.
Our turbine launched today, it was excellent, the largest turbine in the world launched today from Dundee, it’s on its way to Orkney. And this is how we manage the decline of the oil and gas industry; to tackle the climate emergency, to meet our legal requirements under the Paris Agreement, the oil and gas industry must decline.
So, you’ve hitched your wagon, not officially but nonetheless you are supporters of the SNP in government. The SNP are not pledging to phase out fossil fuels within ten years – so are you putting independence before climate change?
So, we have no formal relationship with the SNP. We happen to agree with them on independence but actually on many other policies there is a lot of…
You supported their budget and you’ve supported them in parliament.
Every party has the opportunity to negotiate the budget.
I’m just checking, is independence more important to you than climate?
The climate is the most important thing, absolutely the number one thing. We have nine years left to make fundamental changes to how our society and economy works. And you’ll see in our manifesto that it is a plan for a fair and green recovery from the pandemic. We feel that independence is an important question to ask because in order to implement the full suite of changes we need to build the economy we want, we can do more with independence.
Okay, no, you’ve made that point, so…
We can do more with independence but that also doesn’t mean we can’t do more with the powers that we’ve got. Willie is right to some extent when he says we could do more. Those things can both be true.
Okay. Are you also going to pledge them to phase out fossil fuels within ten years?
No, I think, to go back to Alan’s question, back in 2013-14 when there was a real crisis in the oil and gas sector in Scotland, with a plummeting price, we instituted a number of revisions which allowed people to train out of those jobs into other jobs for that period. And I think what we now have to do is to ensure what people call a just transition so that people that are actually working in that industry can find a way through into new employment opportunities. So we would pledge to do that and also I think we…
And so, when do you intend oil and gas production to stop, Keith?
Pardon?
When do you intend it to stop?
That’s a good question.
Well, I do think it’s very important that we should explore other avenues as well, so for example, carbon capture twice could’ve been started by the UK government and they pulled the plug on it.
So, there are things we can do to address the effects of taking those hydrocarbons out of the ground but eventually we’ll have to stop. Lorna’s right, climate change is an existential threat to the planet – we have to deal with this.
So when do you think…?
We should not be doing it at the expense of people that are currently in that industry and, whatever we do, we have to look after the families and the people involved there.
Well, do you want to give us a timeframe, Keith, give us your plan?
Well, I can’t say specifically when it’s going to stop, it will depend on the supply that’s there just now of course.
So, there you see one of the massive gaps in policy between where the SNP and the Greens are. So, we need to actually be practical about our obligations under the climate…under the Paris Agreement and to, you know, deal with this existential threat. And this is a problem that I have with the SNP approach of setting targets and putting their hopes in things like carbon capture when actually there are already practical technologies that work. Upgrading our rail system, investing in renewable technology and upgrading our homes are all things we can do to reduce our emissions right away, no need to wait.
Douglas?
Lorna said, Alan should be excited about the opportunities that the Greens would provide to him and his colleagues. And I didn’t get from Alan’s question that he was particularly excited about what the Greens would do in this next parliament and the next two parliaments to shut down production of oil and gas in the North Sea. Scottish Conservatives have been very clear, we want to protect the more than 100,000 jobs in Scotland that rely on that sector. The fact that…
Well, though, in your manifesto, you say…
Sorry, I just want to quickly say…
You say, the North Sea oil and gas has a long future decades ahead.
Yes.
Yet today you know there is a huge global climate summit.
Of course.
And you had Boris Johnson pledging to a big cut in carbon emissions – how are you going to keep those two things going in tandem?
It’s totally incompatible.
Because the UK government has committed to a transition deal with the oil and gas sector – £16 billion to work with the experts and the people who have trained in oil and gas over decades, to transition to greener forms of renewable energy.
It’s a first in the G7, but also Deirdre Michie was writing in the P&J earlier on this week about the Green plans, and it’s not just the 100,000 jobs in the North East and in Scotland, it’s 270,000 livelihoods that rely on the oil and gas sector here in Scotland. And that’s what we’ve got to protect and that’s what Scottish Conservatives are doing with our plans.
That’s our way of planning to get 200,000 new jobs.
Okay, we hear you and we’ve heard lots from you, Lorna, thank you very much. Let’s hear from you, George.
Hi. I grew up in Aberdeen so in 2014 the oil crash I saw the impacts of it myself. And it was quite disastrous to the city as a whole because even jobs which aren’t directly in the oil industry get lost due to just the crash and no money in the city. So if we don’t do a transition now, or at least have a plan to transition into a greener economy, we could risk jobs which could be saved if we act now. And in general, I would say everyone on the panel you were all arguing, like, back and forth for independence but for climate change there’s less shouting. So it’s more positive to see but we just need to continue this into actual action rather than just words.
Jo?
Yes, I just echo that. I think that this transition from oil and gas is inevitable so why are we not looking at retraining and upskilling people into renewables now rather than waiting for the inevitable to happen?
Ruth?
Yeah, absolutely. What I do see is that there is a gradual training, which is a damn sight more than the Tories did when the pits closed. I saw precious little training going on for the thousands of miners who just got put out and hung out to dry, you know, I didn’t see any Tories screaming about that.
Well…
I’ll come back to you a minute, Doug, but let me just get round the rest of the panel. So, Labour’s plans in terms of phasing out oil and gas, you’ve made no particular pledges on that?
Well, look, we can only truly talk about a just transition if it takes communities with us, and if we decimate tens of thousands of jobs without a genuine transition to renewable jobs that’s not going to be a fair transition or a just transition.
But there’s actually a wider North East economy point here, because Aberdeen in the surrounding areas is facing a crisis around oil and gas but it’s also got a crisis around the hospitality industry and a crisis around the tourism industry. There is a real economic crisis in the North East and this is one of the reasons why recovery is so important. When we talk about recovery it just can’t be a campaign slogan, it has to actually be a national mission. And the North East is a perfect example of that. Unless we push power and resource out from our parliament into the different parts of Scotland so they can invest in individual sectors, for example, the renewable industry...
Yeah, but Anas, in fairness, I know this is what you want to make in terms of your manifesto but the question is very specifically, how do you view the long-term future of oil and gas workers?
Well, the long-term future has to be one in which we transition to a renewables future, but we’ve got to start that hard work now.
We keep hearing about the Saudi Arabia of renewables, we heard it from Alex Salmond before, we’ve heard it from Boris Johnson now, we’re hearing it now from the Scottish government again. We’ve got to invest seriously and genuinely in those renewable jobs of the future so we can genuinely transition people from the oil and gas industry into renewables. And that work is not happening and [voices overlap 31:41] was a perfect example of that.
Eighty per cent of our fuel is fuelled by renewables.
Okay. Willie?
So, what we need to do is we need to reduce the demand for oil and gas. That means making sure we change the heating in our homes. So, we want to convert from gas the heating in our homes to things like air source heat pumps and other renewables. We want to make sure we have district heating systems that uses hydrogen; also hydrogen for transport. We need to make sure the tremendous potential we’ve got off the shore and Lorna’s talked about it already, with the wind farms, the great opportunities there, a huge resource.
We need to make sure we exploit that potential as well. And if we reduce the demand there won’t in time be the need for the oil and gas reserves that we have in the North Sea. But then we’ll have created the jobs, the thousands…thousands and thousands of jobs will be created populating all that work to make sure that we can reduce that demand. That’s the step by step way.
Okay, quickly.
All the other parties are ignoring the fact that this is already happening. The oil and gas sector are already taking part in this transition. We are taking them with us, with the UK Government’s £16 billion transition deal to make sure that goes further to protect the jobs. But it’s absolutely vital that people understand that’s already happening in the North East and across Scotland right now because it’s being led by the sector, by the Oil and Gas UK and by people like Alan who are doing the work right now.
Okay. Let’s take another question. Doug Renwick.
The various party manifestoes show a vastly differing spending promise. Can you please each explain the key sources for the fund of the spending – do not involve a magic money tree. Thank you.
Right. Well, I’ve been having a close look at all your manifestoes and it’s been a rather interesting read. So, Anas, so let’s start with you – you’re only giving spending promises for the first year.
No, look, what we’re saying is that we have a national recovery plan so we’ve deliberately [slitched 34:16] our manifesto into two parts and made it a recovery plan rather than a party manifesto, it’s a recovery plan for our country.
But you’ve only provided costings for the first year so how can anyone actually work out how you’re going to find the money for the whole term?
No, so what we’re saying is that the investment we need to make immediately in the economy, and immediately around our public services, needs to happen on day one. We can’t wait for the virus to disappear before we start planning for our national recovery.
So, when you have the Institute for Fiscal Studies saying that…
And there are billions of pounds…
…saying that there’s no sense of how much your manifesto would eventually cost and how you pay for it, what’s your answer to that?
Well, look, we’ve been very clear about what we do in terms of the immediate in terms of our national recovery.
So, there are billions of pounds of unallocated recurring and non-recurring spend available to the Scottish government after this election – I want to start spending that money straight away. Alongside that, I want us to build a new tax on online companies like Amazon. We should have an Amazon Tax in Scotland so we can redress the balance between those online giants that made huge profits over the course of this pandemic, and use that money to reinvigorate the high street and get people back to work.
So, Willie, looking at the Lib Dems’ manifesto, as far as I could see it’s not really costed at all. I had a little count and in the entire 52 pages there are only eighteen pound signs.
Okay. No, we have costed our manifesto.
Have you – how? I couldn’t find it.
No, no, well, we’ve costed it and we can make the costings available to you if we wish. But what we’ve gone on is the sector…
So the costings are private, are they? Are they not there for everybody to see?
No, we’ve shared them with journalists.
No, you’ve not, Will; no, you’ve not.
No, we have.
Or not with the IFS.
No, because we have.
I just want to press you on that because we looked through your manifesto…
No, we discussed with the IFS yesterday, we’ve shared the costing with them. I’m not quite sure. We consult…
So, when we look at your manifesto and you’ve only…there’s no actual reference to exactly how you pay for things.
Okay. Well, let me explain, I’ll explain. So, we’ve gone for the central estimate of the Scottish government’s medium term financial strategy.
We’ve committed a billion pounds of extra spending. That’s for things like three and a half thousand permanent teachers, to make sure that we increase the spending on the NHS, the mental health spend of £400 million. The two and a half billion pounds on top of that billion is for the NHS, and then we’ve left plenty of headroom to be able to afford an increase in pay for social care workers but also…
And so, where it’s going to come from?
Well, the medium-term financial strategy, which is a cautious document which has been based on the work from the Office of Budget Responsibility and the Fiscal Commission in Scotland.
So it’s not a magic money tree…
It’s not.
…but where it’s going to come from?
Well, I’ve explained – it’s the medium-term financial… It’s roughly the same approach that the Scottish government has taken in terms of picking the central estimate. And it’s allowed for plenty of headroom to be able to afford unexpected events over the next period.
So, believe me, it is well affordable because I am determined to make sure that everything we promise is affordable and deliverable. We are not going to over-promise – it’s cautious, it’s got plenty of headroom and it means we can do things like making sure that we’re going to get those million heat pumps in people’s homes. It’s making sure that we can employ those extra teachers so we can get bounce-back support in education, and that we can make sure that we can get a recovery in the NHS dealing with all these massive waits that people have got to deal with.
Okay. Lorna, looking at the Greens manifesto I was a bit puzzled because you’re planning to increase taxation using powers that you don’t actually have at the moment, that you would only have if you were an independent Scotland like wealth taxes, for example – so how that’s going to work?
Well, that’s an interesting discussion that we would like to have with the government in Westminster. The government in Westminster has said that they are wanting to invest and look at the taxation system, so hopefully we can work with them. I mean, if we [voices overlap 37:49] on recovery.
So, just to be clear, you’re wanting to raise money through taxes that you don’t actually have the power to raise money with at the moment?
That’s kind of option A. Option B…
Well, it’s not an option at all at the moment, is it, because you don’t have those powers?
Well, if the Westminster government won’t work with us… We would like them to work with us on this. I mean, we’re not an independent country yet. If we’re really talking about the UK working together as a whole maybe…and if they want Scotland to show…you know, if they want to show Scotland how good that is.
Do you think that’s likely?
The plan B would be to do it using local taxation powers, but we’ll have to wait and see how open Westminster is to working with Scotland on a joint recovery. I mean, it would be a very interesting thing. In terms of [also 38:24] paying with it, not only would we ask for, you know, the wealthy to help contribute, for example those companies who have done so fantastically well who’ve made billions off of the pandemic to…
I think it’s a one-time windfall tax would be reasonable to help the country recover. But we would also, you know, expect the wealthy to pay more. We’ve got to rebalance the inequalities in our society.
So you want to raise taxes, okay. Debbie?
Hi there, good evening. I’m just wondering how the Green Party can justify the increase through taxation when part of their manifesto is looking towards moving to a four-day working week. Surely, people need to earn more money to raise additional taxation.
That is an excellent question and thank you very much for asking it. So, the kind of taxes that we’re looking at are windfall taxes on massive corporations and, for example, a wealth tax on people who have assets of over a million pounds.
So, again, this is the tax that you have to get the government…the UK government to agree to hand over to you, but at the moment you don’t have that power.
We’re not talking about taking pounds out of ordinary people’s pockets, we’re not talking about increasing taxes on your work. In fact, we believe that for the economy to function well we have to put money into people’s pockets. And that’s why we would support things like a universal basic income, for example, helping with child payments. So, this is about the very very wealthy paying a little bit more, not ordinary people.
So, Doug, you want to cut business rates and lower taxes.
For the rich.
How are you going to pay for everything, where’s your magic money tree?
So, Doug’s point is crucial because Scottish Conservatives are the only party in this election who, with our manifesto, published our full spending commitments. We have set that…
That’s not true.
Well, Keith, oh come on.
And you know it’s not true, we’ve got it fully costed.
Well, it’s absolutely…if you think your manifesto is fully costed.
Well, maybe you should read it first, it’s right here.
It’s going to cost more than double the current Scottish budget.
That’s just a nonsense.
So, that’s typical fancy economics from the SNP. But in terms of our plans, it’s focused on recovery, it’s focused on investing, it’s focused on supporting the NHS. IFS say the Scottish Conservative plans are the most generous for the NHS out of all the parties in this election.
But where are you going to get the money from?
So, what we’re saying, for example, there’s £4.8 billion of unallocated capital spend in the Scottish government at the moment. We need to get that money out – so that drives our infrastructure growth right across the country, be it full fibre broadband, be it, you know, investing in more house building, the most ambitious social housing building programme since devolution that the Scottish Conservatives are putting forward.
And then we have said, only at the end of the parliament, if we can, you know, rebuild our education system by recruiting 3,000 additional teachers at a cost of £550 million over the course of the parliament, we would look to get parity back in the tax system, if it is possible. Because 1.1 million Scots currently pay more tax right now for doing the exact same job than elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
Well, that’s [more income 41:23] for those at the top.
One point one million.
Tax cuts for the rich.
Okay. I just want to hear a little bit more from our audience – Shelly?
Hello. Douglas Ross, I’m struck by the various areas that you say for investment, but I don’t hear you talking about people, I’m not hearing you talk about communities. The people who’ve been the most hit, I would say, are the disadvantaged. We’re expecting a huge homelessness spike and a peak – how would you, kind of, see that the investment where you’re going to place it is going to respond to any of these issues?
No, it’s a great point, Shelly. That’s why we want to build 60,000 new social homes in the next parliament, the most ambitious social housing project since devolution.
And cut universal credit [voices overlap 41:59].
That’s why we want to roll out full fibre broadband by 2027, because one of the biggest things that we’ve seen during this pandemic is people not being connected with friends and loved ones. Why are we still in 2021 struggling with good Wi-Fi signals in many parts of Scotland? That’s the type of investment that can connect people and communities all over again.
But, Douglas, why do you think it’s a priority to give you and me and Anas and Keith and Lorna a tax cut, why do you think that’s a priority?
Well, I am happy not to accept that…
Oh come on.
…but I would like to give it to 1.1 million people in Scotland.
Oh come on. You’re obviously embarrassed about it and that’s why you’re not going to accept it.
No, I’d love to give it to the teachers, to the police officers in Scotland. One point one million people in Scotland who pay more tax here for doing the exact same job than anybody else in the United Kingdom.
But most people here pay less tax.
No, Scotland is the highest taxed part of the United Kingdom.
Because most people in Scotland pay…are in the lower band that pay less tax. Some people in Scotland pay more tax, though, but people who are…
One point one million.
Okay. Let’s get back to the question from Doug, which is how your manifestoes show vastly different spending promises, how can you explain how you’re funded. So, you say your manifesto is fully costed, I had a look through that as well. There’s some things I couldn’t find, maybe I missed them, how much is free dental care going to cost?
It depends exactly on the agreement we reach with the BDA but it could be around...
But how much do you think it would?
Probably about £137 million.
Where’s that going to come from?
That’s going to come from the budget that we have. Willie mentioned before that the basis for drawing up budgets in the Scottish government is a central…an optimistic, if you like, and a less optimistic estimate. We’ve taken the central estimate, as Willie appears to have done, to calculate. So you know the money that’s going to come in from Scottish taxpayers giving money to the UK Exchequer and the money we get back, and also from the Scottish taxation system which is both more progressive and less onerous than the UK system. But if I can come back to Douglas’s point, he said that his is the only costed his manifesto – he couldn’t answer the question where the £600 million of cuts in the NHS was going to come from.
Oh no, come on, Keith.
Well, you had your answer, Douglas and I just want to...
Just let Keith make a point and then you can answer it.
And if it’s the case that he can’t answer basic questions like that, and yet he accuses Nicola Sturgeon of taking her eye off the ball – which ball is he…? He’s going to be First Minister, he’s going to be an MP, he’s going to be an MSP and he’s going to be a referee – which ball are you going to be looking at when you drop the budget?
Keith, I’m sure someone wrote that for you this afternoon.
Oh no.
And it looked great on paper.
Can you answer it?
But we’re speaking about your party’s manifesto that is not costed.
It is costed.
And you’re asking about our £600 million investment to catch up on all the delayed appointments and treatments within the NHS.
Where’s the money coming from?
It’s a priority within the NHS right now, and every single party…
Where’s the money coming from?
We have…
You’ve not identified it.
We’ve got the most generous….
[Voices overlap 44:37] savings, you’ve said.
No, absolutely not, Keith.
You have.
It’s clear that we are going to focus that £600 million on…
Tax cuts.
On catching up the delayed appointments and treatments and operations that…
Have you not said that’s going to have to come from within the existing NHS budget?
Yes, he did.
So what will you have to cut to find that £600?
No. So, what we’ve said is during the pandemic the UK government have provided the Scottish government with an additional £13.3 billion to deal with the pandemic. We want to use that money, £600 million of it, to give it to the clinicians, rather than the government saying how to spend that, to catch up. But every party is saying we’ve got to catch up on missed operations, delayed treatments, so how are you paying for it, Keith?
Well, I’ll tell you what, we’ve got a question on…
How are you paying for it?
Hang on, we’ve got a question on health, so let’s hear from our questioner. Jude, you’re sitting there very patiently in your beautiful blue room, incidentally – let’s hear your question.
Thank you. Is the NHS in Scotland ready for the task ahead to meet the needs of our patients, including COVID rehabilitation?
Right, so Keith, I know you want to come back. Willie, I’m going to start with you. You’ve talked about drug deaths already, let’s look at those in the NHS.
So, at the core of this we’ve got a mountain of mental health needs, we’ve got a mountain of people who are waiting for their operations, their appointments. And what we need to do is to use some of the new technologies and new ways of working that we’ve developed through the pandemic, to make sure that we can deal with this backlog as quickly as possible. We’ve got two and a half billion pounds of extra funding that’s going to be committed to the NHS over this period, and that means we’ll have the finance.
But at the heart of this, we need to deal with the problem that pervades much of the public services, which is our mental health problem. We’re not training any more psychiatrists and psychologists than we did five years ago. We need to have mental health first-aiders in every single work place so we can reduce the demand on the NHS. We also need to make sure that we’re deploying the mental health counsellors that are in the community to be able to take the load off there as well. So, that will help significantly.
So, Jude’s question, Keith, is is the NHS in Scotland ready for the task ahead? Just looking at the funding again, you know, we’ve got the election coming up, obviously – why are you promising a smaller increase in funding than the UK government?
Well, we’ve said, very similar to what Willie just said, two and a half billion pounds. And I think it’s also true to say we start off from a higher per head expenditure on health services in Scotland.
But, so why are you promising a smaller increase in funding?
Well, but what we’ve also said is, if there are further consequences that come, we will allocate that to the health service. So I don't think it’s possible to be definitive over what the UK does from a lower base compared to what Scotland does, and as the point that was made earlier…
But nonetheless I’m just thinking, it is a smaller increase in funding, there’s no getting round that.
Well, there is actually. If the consequential…
Well, it’s 2.1per cent versus 3.4per cent.
Well, I think those figures are disputed, the UK figures are disputed by experts. But if we put the two and a half billion pounds which I mentioned, and anything in addition to that, there are consequential monies, then it could be the case that the increase is even greater. Plus, as Willie rightly says, we also have an additional commitment to mental health services. And also, to the point he made about a link worker, for example, in every health centre. So, there are additional expenditures. And what we what to do is, by the time of the end of the next parliament, have one tenth of the entire NHS budget going towards mental health because of some of the problems.
But if I can just say, the NHS I think has done a fantastic job through the pandemic. They are tired, doubtless, but they’ve done a fantastic job.
Well, let’s hear from someone who works for the NHS who happens to be in our audience. Pippa, you’re a junior doctor, I think?
Yeah, that’s right. I think it was referenced earlier the idea of a national care service. And my experience over the last year is that that’s one of our main problems, not having safe and available places to discharge elderly and frail patients to. They’re not always benefiting from acute admissions to hospitals and then they get a bit stuck and in hospital they’re at risk of hospital carried infections, including COVID. And I think that’s got to be one of the main points for discussion when we’re discussing moving the health service in Scotland forward.
And Judith?
Yes, thank you. I work in the biotech industry and I would say the health care system in Scotland, or in the UK for that matter, is not prepared for what is coming. There is a tsunami of conditions that are coming our way. I work particularly in Alzheimer’s disease. And Alzheimer’s disease was a leading cause of death in the UK up until COVID took over, but recently, with the decline in COVID deaths, Alzheimer’s disease has once again taken that unfortunate top spot.
And patients have been told don’t…you know, have been afraid to go and see the doctor no matter whether we’ve told them to come, they haven’t. And we’re going to see more pandemics. So, I just see all of these trends happening and I’m not convinced we’re doing enough about it.
Okay. Anas?
I think, Judith and Pippa are both right, our NHS staff have gone…and social care staff have gone above and beyond over this pandemic. But the reality is they were overworked and undervalued even before the pandemic, and we had a huge backlog on care around cancer, around missed and cancelled operations or in mental health even before the pandemic, and they have now been exacerbated by the pandemic. And the only way we’re going to address these issues is fundamental, yes, investment – that’s investment in terms of capital infrastructure, it’s changing the way we do healthcare, but it’s also about…
And on investment, Anas, you’re pledging to spend even less than the SNP.
No, not at all.
In the first year?
No, not at all. So, what we’re saying is…
Three hundred and fifty million versus 500 million?
You know, so what we need is rapid diagnosis centres, but we’re not going to build the physical buildings and those rapid diagnosis centres in the time of weeks or months – so let’s get temporary facilities up and running right now, so we can start that one.
But just to be clear, in the first year, are you saying you’re pledging to spend as much as the SNP on the NHS?
So, what we’re saying is there’s much more longer-term capital investment.
Oh so it’s this long term that we don’t know about…
No, no. I want…
…but in the first year it’s not as much.
No, I want us to start that work straightaway in terms of building that capital infrastructure, but it’s going to take time to get that capital infrastructure into place. Well, we can’t afford to wait.
So I think that’s a no, okay.
No, we can’t afford to wait for the buildings to be built before we start catching up on the screening programmes. So let’s invest in the work force and that means increasing the level of the work force, it means doing things differently. That involves paying our NHS staff better as well as our social care staff.
Decent wage increase, yeah.
So, we want a £12 an hour pay increase for social care staff rising to £15 an hour over the course of the next parliament.
Okay.
We want a mental health worker in every GP practice. We want rapid diagnosis centres, we want to prioritise on mental health. Keith talks about the budget – we currently spend eight per cent of our budget on mental health, the UK average is around 11.5 per cent.
Okay. I need to get round the rest of the panel, Anas, forgive me or they won’t have time. Doug?
So, our NHS staff and social care staff have gone above and beyond over the last year, and they’re going to continue to do so. And what we’ve heard from both Judith and Pippa…
So, why did you refuse to back the SNP proposal of a four per cent increase in the NHS pay? I mean, you’ve now done a U-turn, I think, and you now do support it.
No, it was never a U-turn, we were being asked totally different questions. But we are clear that we…
Well, you said you’d wait for the pay review, there hasn’t been a pay review but you do now support the four per cent?
Absolutely – support the four per cent, but it’s still out for consultation and it’ll be after the election before we understand the outcome of the ballot that will be taken on that.
But we do have to support our NHS and social care staff because it’s not just the last year that’s been so difficult, the next year is going to be really difficult. That’s why we want to invest hundreds of millions of pounds in the next year to catch up because people were waiting a long time for appointments and operations before COVID hit. And many of them were just getting ready to go into hospital for urgent operations, hip replacements, just as COVID hit and now they’ve been left another year waiting. And I say again, the IFS has said the Scottish Conservative plans for the health services and funding for the health service are the most generous in this election because we can see that’s where the priority is.
That’s why you have tax cuts.
That’s where the priority is for everyone speaking on the call tonight because they want to get us to catch up on operations, on treatments that have been missed, on appointments that have been delayed, and that’s why we need to invest over the next year.
Lorna?
I think Judith described very clearly three of the long-term trends that we’ve seen in healthcare in Scotland and indeed in the UK that I think are concerns – increase in mental health problems, problems with not having care places to put people in that have, you know, led to the sort of bed blocking and that kind of problems; and chronic health problems that we see that really are a result of poverty and inequality.
So, we’ve all talked about the, kind of, acute issues, addressing the immediate issues of COVID. But let’s also look at the bigger picture and look at restructuring our economy because those are all things we can do something about.
So, alleviation of poverty goes a long way to doing those things, you know, good work, fair wages, all these things go a long way to that, and so will the national care service. All of this is part of rebalancing our economy, and I look forward to getting to work on it.
Okay. Jude, you asked this question, what do you think of what you’ve heard?
Yeah, I would welcome, of course, any solid investment and commitment to community-based rehabilitation services. I think the investment is a genuinely important element. I also think we should be aiming for a joined up approach across acute services and community services.
We need to have a multi-professional approach to this and we need to really support these patients right across their journey of rehabilitation. The 2009 NICE guideline tells us that we need high-quality rehabilitative services for any patient suffering a serious illness, and that includes COVID. And I believe that we have the staff, allied health professionals, we have these staff with the skills to be able to work across a range of…to meet a range of patients’ needs, including physical and mental health. And I feel we just need that joined up approach but also the investment that comes along with it.
And Lynne, you’ve had your hand up throughout.
I actually was going to say something very very similar. I get really frustrated listening to politicians talk about what Health needs and to quote statistics and figures. I work with young people and I can’t echo more the need to see health holistically tied up with that whole development of people, especially young people. How many problems and health issues could we prevent in the years to come?
And do you think you’re seeing that from any of the politicians you’ve got here today?
I’m disappointed, if I’m honest, I’m disappointed.
Okay. Ryan?
Yeah, I would just say that I just find it, kind of, not overly surprising but just amazing that the same people who have for the last year voted for these really tight restrictions on our civil liberties and freedoms then discuss how they’re going to fix the problems that have been caused by those laws in place. And I know that the response will probably be that we’d no alternative but this has been a year now, we’ve had a year to really think about things.
Now, I’m sure you’d all like to come back in on that but I’m afraid our time is up. Ryan, thank you very much for your point and of course, all of you in the audience. To my panel, thank you very much for coming here this evening, appreciate it very much, and of course to you at home for watching. From Question Time, bye-bye.